===76 DLR (AD) 1===
Judgment
Appellate Division (Civil)
Present:
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman
Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan
Mr. Justice Borhanuddin
Mr. Justice M. Enayetur Rahim
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1192 of 2022
(From the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.1481 of 2020)
Government of Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Liberation War Affairs, Dhaka and others
... Petitioners
-Versus-
Muhammad Ismail Hossain and others
... Respondents
Judgment Date: November 27, 2022
Mr. Nowroz Md. Rasel Chowdhury, Deputy Attorney General, instructed by Mr. Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record.
... For the petitioners
Mr. Muhammad Ismail Hossain (In person)
... For the respondent No. 1
For the respondents No.2-6
... Not represented
Judgment
Obaidul Hassan, J.
This Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal (CPLA) is directed against the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division on 15.11.2021 in Writ Petition No.1481 of 2020 making the Rule absolute.
2. The writ-petitioner filed the said writ petition contending inter alia that being influenced by the historical speech of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, he participated in the War of Liberation and was involved in several operations with his co-fighters including the operation conducted in Pabna Telephone Bhaban, destroying the rail line of the Goalbathan Railway Station. After the war was over, the writ-petitioner surrendered his weapon and the Chief of the National Militia Camp, Pabna Sadar issued a certificate in favour of the writ-petitioner on 23.03.1972. In 2001, Bangladesh Muktijodha Sangsad (shortly BAMUS) took an initiative to prepare the list of genuine freedom fighters and for this purpose, it formed a district-wise sub-committee and the writ petitioner's name was included in the said BAMUS list. Accordingly, BAMUS issued an identity card to the writ-petitioner as a freedom fighter. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Prime Minister, Sheikh Hasina being Chief Advisor of BAMUS issued a certificate in his favour on 19.03.2021. Subsequently, the writ-respondent No.1 i.e. the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs issued another certificate recognizing the writ-petitioner as a freedom fighter. Later on, Pabna Zilla Jachai Bachai Committee convened a meeting on 20.06.2007 and approved the name of the writ petitioner to be included as a freedom fighter and also recommended his name to the National Committee for Gazette publication. Subsequently, the writ petitioner's name was published in the Gazette notification on 12.05.2013. As per the government direction, a database was prepared for each genuine freedom fighter and accordingly, the name of the writ-petitioner was also included in the said database with the ID No.0504070553 and the writ-petitioner had been receiving freedom fighter's allowance.
3. The government framed "বীর মুক্তিযোদ্ধাদের সম্মানী ভাতা নীতিমালা, ২০১৩" wherein the term 'freedom fighter' has been defined in Clause No.4 providing 5(five) different criteria and the writ-petitioner fulfills all the criteria. At the end of 2019, the writ-petitioner was staying outside the country and upon his arrival, he came to learn that a letter was sent in his name, but it was posted at the village, Kathpara instead of Protappur where he actually lives. Thereafter, a letter under memo No.48.02.0000.004.00.014.19-195 dated 12.11.2009 was issued by the writ-respondent No.2 under the signature of the writ-respondent No.4 addressing the writ-petitioner stating that one, Md. Ali Jobbar filing an application raised an allegation against his status of Freedom Fighter and the writ-petitioner was requested to remain present at the designated place as part of investigation. In the said application it was also alleged that the writ-petitioner was involved in terrorist activity and at that time he was fugitive although no documentary evidence or name of any eye-witness was supplied with the application in support of the allegation. However, on 08.12.2019, the writ-petitioner appeared in the hearing with his two co-fighters who are genuine freedom fighters and brought all the documentary evidences to prove his participation in the Liberation War. But during the hearing, the writ-petitioner was not provided any opportunity to defend himself against the allegation. The said hearing was held by the Chairman of the writ-respondent No.2 himself. Being disappointed and skeptical with the result of the said hearing the writ petitioner submitted a written statement to the writ-respondent No. 1. Subsequently, the matter was placed before the Jatiyo Muktijoddha Council (shortly JAMUCA) to recommend the cancellation of the freedom fighter certificate of the writ petitioner. The said investigation by the writ-respondent No.2 for verification of the genuine freedom fighter is held in clear violation of Section 7 of the জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২ and মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই বাচাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬. The writ-petitioner filed a writ petition impugning the said investigation proceedings and Rule was issued by the High Court Division.
4. By filing a supplementary-affidavit, the writ-petitioner further stated that after obtaining the certificate of the Rule issuing order dated 09.03.2020 passed by the High Court Division, the writ-petitioner filed an application on 12.08.2020 annexing the certified copy of the order and other relevant documents requesting the writ-respondent No.2 to dispose of the written reply dated 02.03.2020. The writ-respondent No.2 though received the copy of the same, but had not disposed of the said written reply. Having been informed about the aforesaid complaint made by one, Md. Ali Zabbar, the writ-petitioner on 16.02.2020 submitted an application to the Hon'ble Minister, the Ministry of Liberation War Affairs asserting that he is a genuine freedom fighter yet neither the writ-respondent No.1 nor the writ-respondent No.2 did pay any heed to the same. Rather, the writ-respondent No.2 without taking into consideration of the representation on 08.03.2020 put a note to re-arrange a hearing where the writ-petitioner was not given any opportunity of being heard on the allegation brought against him. The writ-respondent No.2 passed the impugned decisions (Annexures-'S' and 'S-1') violating the principle of natural justice.
5. Upon hearing a Division Bench of the High Court Division made the substantive as well as supplementary Rule absolute by the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021.
6. Mr. Nowroz Md. Rasel Chowdhury, the learned Deputy Attorney General appearing on behalf of the petitioners assailing the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021 of the High Court Division submits that the High Court Division erred in law by passing the impugned judgment and order inasmuch as the action in question was taken by the concerned authority, so no illegality has been committed by the writ-respondents and the principle of natural justice has not been violated by the writ-respondents prior to taking the action in question and further through publication of Gazette notification and Jachai Bachai is a continuous process and based on factual dispute the same cannot be challenged under the writ jurisdiction. The learned Counsel contends next that the writ itself is not maintainable as the gazette notification cancelling the freedom fighter's certificate was published on the basis of the provision provided in Section 7 (ha) of the জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২ and unless and until Section 7(Jha) is challenged, the writ in its present form cannot sustain as such the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside. The learned Counsel argues lastly that the writ-petitioner got the opportunity to defend himself before the 'council' and the writ-petitioner asserted certain facts which had been denied by the writ-respondents leaving the alleged assertion of the writ-petitioner as disputed question of facts regarding which the writ petition is not maintainable and as such the writ-petitioner should place his grievance before civil Court.
7. On the other hand, Mr. Muhammad Ismail Hossain, the respondent No. 1 himself with the permission of this Court vehemently opposes the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the petitioners. He argues that according to মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই বাচাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬ JAMUCA has no jurisdiction to verify the list of freedom fighters, rather it can get the same verified and investigated by the concerned Upazila Jachai Bachai Committee, but the writ-respondent No.2 without complying with the said provisions of law acted illegally and the High Court Division on proper appreciation of law and facts made the Rules absolute. The respondent No.1 contends further that he has neither been given an opportunity of being heard nor any scope has been given to produce oral or documentary evidence before cancelling the freedom fighter's certificate. He contends next that the impugned notifications are perverse, irrational and opposed to the principle of natural justice and thus violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 27 and 31 of the Constitution, and due to all the foregoing reasons the respondent No.1 craves the leave petition to be rejected.
8. We have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioners as well as the respondent No.1 himself, perused the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021 passed by the High Court Division and the materials on record.
9. At the threshold it unfolds that the High Court Division while making the Rules absolute laid emphasis on two scores. Firstly, JAMUCA itself was not entitled to make investigation to verify the lists of freedom fighters and secondly, the writ-respondent No.2 on the basis of its own investigation and without giving the writ-petitioner an opportunity of being heard as well as producing oral or documentary evidence assailing the allegation brought against him, illegally cancelled the freedom fighter's certificate of the writ-petitioner.
10. At this juncture, it is convenient to discuss the relevant provisions of law. Section 7 of the জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২ is as follows:
"৭। কাউন্সিলের কার্যাবলী-কাউন্সিলের কার্যাবলী হইবে নিম্নরূপ, যথাঃ-
(ঝ) প্রকৃত মুক্তিযোদ্ধাদের তালিকা প্রণয়ন, সনদপত্র ও প্রত্যয়নপত্র প্রদানে এবং জাল ও ভূয়া সনদপত্র ও প্রত্যয়নপত্র বাতিলের জন্য সরকারের নিকট সুপারিশ প্রেরণ;"
Again, মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই-বাছাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬ provides that:
"যাচাই-বাছাই পদ্ধতি:
১। জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল (জামুকা) কর্তৃক নির্ধারিত তারিখ, স্থান ও সময়ে উপজেলা/জেলা/ মহানগর যাচাই-বাছাই কমিটির মাধ্যমে যাচাই-বাছাই কার্যক্রম সম্পাদন করা হবে।"
11. Now, a pertinent question arises whether JAMUCA itself can hold inquiry or investigation to verify the lists of freedom fighters. In this regard, our considered view is that Section 7(Jha) of the জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২ authorizes JAMUCA to prepare lists of freedom fighters and distribute certificate as freedom fighters. Under the said provisions of law, JAMUCA is also entitled to make recommendation for cancellation of forged and false certificate of the freedom fighters. We are also of the view that JAMUCA can itself cancel the forged and false certificate of the freedom fighters. On the other hand, মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই-বাচাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬ has been framed to streamline the whole process under which JAMUCA can get the verification of the real freedom fighters through Upazila Jachai Bachai Committee, but that does not inevitably construe that only Upazila Jachai Bachai Committee is entitled to hold the verification or investigation process. JAMUCA can also, at any time, amend such Jachai Bachai Directives. Thus, মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই-বাচাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬, being mere directives will not put an embargo upon JAMUCA to hold inquiry/investigation including cancellation of freedom fighter's certificate under Section 7 (Ma) of the জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২. In the given circumstances, the High Court Division fell in error of law in making the substantive Rule nullifying the investigation process regarding the genuineness of the freedom fighter's certificate of the writ-petitioner-respondent No.1.
12. However, from the record it is evident that the writ-petitioner-respondent No.1 has not been given an opportunity of being heard as well as producing oral or documentary evidence including the examination of witness before cancellation of his freedom fighter's certificate. Thus, the High Court Division has correctly made the supplementary Rule absolute in declaring the No.48.00.0000.004.37.003.20.2022 dated 07.10.2020 issued under the signature of the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Liberation War Affairs regarding cancellation of freedom fighter's certificate illegal.
13. In view of the discussion made above, we find that JAMUCA was entitled to hold inquiry/investigation regarding the genuineness of the freedom fighter's certificate, but the High Court Division failed to consider this aspect of the case and, as such, the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.1481 of 2020 making the substantive Rule absolute is liable to be interfered with only to that extent.
14. Thus, the following words of the judgment and order dated 15.11.2021 of the High Court Division while making the substantive Rule absolute are expunged-
"The impugned action of the respondent No.2 carrying out investigation for verification of the genuine/actual freedom fighters is thus in contravention of জাতীয় মুক্তিযোদ্ধা কাউন্সিল আইন, ২০০২ and মুক্তিযোদ্ধা যাচাই-বাচাই নির্দেশিকা, ২০১৬."
15. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal is disposed of.

===End===
