===10 CLR (AD) 1=== ===30 BLT (AD) 155=== ===26 ALR (AD) 8=== ===74 DLR (AD) 1=== ===18 ADC (AD) 682===
Appellate Division 
(Civil)
Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman

Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.1340 of 2021
With
CP Nos. 1184, 1009 of 2021 & CP Nos. 605 of 2020, 1523 of 2021.

(From the judgment and order dated 2-5-2021, 5-5-2021, 16-3-2021, 26-1-2020 and 14-3-2021 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos. 4162, 4437, 824 of 2021, 13300 of 2019 and 1046 of 2021 respectively.)

Durnity Daman Commission
... Petitioner [In all the cases]
VS
GB Hossain and other
... Respondents [In CP No.1340/21]
Tafsir Mohammad Awal and others
... Respondents [In CP No.1184/21]
Ariff Hass and another
... Respondents (In CP No.605/20)
Md Ataur Rahman alias Ataur Rahman
... Respondents [In CP No.1009/21]
Md Ahsan Habib and others
... Respondents [In CP No.1523/21]

Judgement Date : September 27, 2021

Counsels:
AM Amin Uddin, Attorney-General with Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate, instructed by Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Petitioner. (In CP No. 1340 of 2021)

AM Ami Uddin, Attorney-General with Khurshid Alam Khan; Advocate instructed by Sufia Khatun Advocate-on-Record
— For the Petitioner (In CP No. 1184 of 2021)

AM Amin Uddin, Attorney General with Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed by Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on Record
— For the Petitioner. (In CP No. 1009 of 2021)

Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed by Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Petitioner. (In CP No.605 of 2020)

AM Ami Uddin, Attorney-General with AKM Fazlul Haque, Advocate instructed by Shahanara Begum Advocate-on-Record
— For the Petitioner. (In CP No.1523 of 2021)

Ruhul Quddus, Advocate instructed by Md Abdul Hye Bhuiyan, Advocate-on-Record
— For Respondent No. l. (In C No.1340 of 2021)

AM Mahbubuddin, Advocate instructed by Md Taufique Hossain, Advocate on-Record
— For Respondent No.1. (In CP No.1184 of 2021)

Probir Neogi, Senior Advocate (with Munshi Moniruzzaman, Advocate) instructed by Hasina Akther, Advocate-on-Record
— For Respondent No.1 (In CP No. 1009 of 2021)

Mohammad Arsadur Rouf Advocate instructed b Madhumaloti Chowdhury Barua, Advocate-on-Record
— For Respondent No. 1. (In CP No.60 of 2020)

Murad Reza, Advocate, instructed by Mohd. Abdul Hye, Advocate-on-Record
— For Respondent No. 1. (In CP No.1523 of 2021)

Biswajit Debnath, Deputy Attorney-General (appeared with the leave of the Court)
— For the Proforma respondents. (In all the cases)

Judgment
Hasan Foez Siddique, J: These Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos.605 of 2020, 1009, 1184, 1340 and 1523 of 2021 have been heard together and they are being disposed of by this common judgment and order since the issue involved in all these cases, is almost identical, therefore, we find it expedient to decide the titled cases together. In all the petitions Durnity Daman Commission (hereinafter referred to as Commission) are the petitioners.

2. Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.605 of 2020 is directed against the judgment and order dated 26-1-2020 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.13300 of 2019. Respondent Arif Hassan was the writ petitioner in that writ petition. He obtained Rule in the High Court Division calling upon the writ respondents (Government and others) to show cause as to why the action of the writ respondents in violation of the writ petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed under Articles 27, 31, 32 and 36 of the Constitution by preventing him and imposing embargo upon his leaving Bangladesh should not be declared to be without lawful authority and is of no legal effect and for, a direction upon the writ respondents to allow him to leave and re-enter Bangladesh. The High Court Division upon hearing the parties disposed of the Rule with the direction upon the writ respondents to allow the writ petitioner (bearing Passport No. BY0140253) to go abroad. The High Court Division also directed the writ petitioner-respondent to come back to Bangladesh within three months from the date of his departure for abroad and to inform the writ respondent No.7, Commission about his return to Bangladesh and to file an affidavit-in-compliance without fail.

3. Against the said judgment and order dated 26-1-2020 passed in Writ Petition No.13300 of 2019, the Commission has filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.605 of 2020.

4. Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1009 of 2021 has been filed by the Commission against the judgment and order dated 16-3-2021 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.824 of 2021. The said writ petition was filed by one Md Ataur Rahman @ Ataur Rahman. He obtained Rule calling upon the writ respondents to show cause as to why the order communicated under Nathi No.00.01.0000.501. 01.113.19-31084/1(3) dated 20-12-2020 issued by an Assistant Director of the Commission asking the writ respondent No.5 (Special Police Super, Immigration) (Airport Special Branch, Bangladesh Police) imposing embargo upon the writ petitioner to leave Bangladesh should not be declared to have been passed without lawful authority and was of no legal effect.

5. The High Court Division by a judgment and order dated 16-3-2021 made the Rule absolute with following observations and directions:

“বিতর্কিত আদেশ, সংযুক্তি-এইচ যার দ্বারা কমিশন ইমিগ্রেশন কর্তৃপক্ষ, রেসপন্ডেন্ট নং ৫ কে আবেদনকারী যাতে দেশ ত্যাগ করতে না পারে সে মর্মে ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণের অনুরোধ জানিয়েছিল-তা আইনসঙ্গত কর্তৃপক্ষ ব্যতিরেকে করা হয়েছে এবং এর কোন আইনগত কার্যকারিতা নাই মর্মে ঘোষিত হলো।

তবে আবেদনকারী বিদেশ যেতে চাইলে তিনি কোন ফোন ও ই-মেইল নম্বর কমিশন-কে লিখিতভাবে জানাতে হবে। কমিশন প্রয়োজন মনে করলে অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে ই-মেইল ও মোবাইল ফোনে বার্তা দিয়ে যুক্তি সঙ্গত সময় দিয়ে আসামীকে অনুসন্ধান বা তদন্তের স্বার্থে কমিশনের সম্মুখে হাজির হওয়ার নির্দেশ দিতে পারবে। এ ক্ষেত্রে আবেদনকারীকে অবশ্যই কমিশনের সামনে উপস্থিত হতে হবে।”

6. Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1184 of 2001 has been filed against the judgment and order dated 5-5-2021 passed in Writ Petition No.4437 of 2021. Respondent Tafsir Mohammad Awal filed the said Writ Petition in the High Court Division against the Government, Anti-Corruption Commission and others challenging the action of the writ respondents preventing him from going outside Bangladesh. He also challenged the legality of the letter communicated under Memo No.00.01.0000.502. 01.037.20.21479 dated 4-10-2020 issued by the Commission. Filing the aforesaid writ petition, the writ petitioner- respondent obtained Rule and ad-interim order directing the writ respondents to allow him to leave and re- enter Bangladesh for a period of 3(three) months from date subject to no order of restraint or warrant of arrest pending against him. The Commission, against the said ad-interim order dated 5-5-2021 passed in Writ Petition No.4437 of 2021, has filed this Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal.

7. Facts of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1340 of 2021, in short, are that respondent No.1, GB Hasan as writ petitioner filed Writ Petition No.4162 of 2021 in the High Court Division challenging the order communicated under Memo No. (১৫৬২৫ ঢাকা, প্রধান কার্যালয় ঢাকার নথি নং-দুদক/বিঃ তদন্ত-১/নাঃলঃ প্রঃ/৫৫-২০১৪ dated 18-4-2016 issued by the Commission asking the writ respondent No.5, Special Police Super, Immigration (Airport) Special Branch, Bangladesh Police Dhaka imposing embargo upon his leaving Bangladesh should not be declared unlawful. The High Court Division, by an order dated 2-5-2021, issued Rule and passed ad-interim direction upon the writ respondents to allow the writ petitioner-respondent to leave and re-enter Bangladesh for a period of 6(six) months from date subject to no order of restraint or warrant of arrest pending against him. Impugning the said ad-interim order, the Commission has filed this Civil Petition.

8. Facts, in a nutshell, of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1523 of 2021 are that respondent No.1 Md Ahsan Habib filed Writ Petition No.1046 of 2021 in the High Court Division challenging the letter communicated under memo No.28923 dated 21-7-2019 issued under the signature writ respondent No.7, Deputy Director of Anti-Corruption Commission so far the same relates to the writ petitioner-respondent imposing embargo upon him to leave and re-enter the country and retention/seizure of the writ petitioner's Passport No.BY0288904 by the office-in-charge (Immigration Police) Special Branch;Hazrat Shahjala International Airport, Dhaka and obtained Rule. The High Court Division, by the impugned judgment and order dated 14-3-2019, disposed of the Rule formulating following guidelines:

That if any person/accused of the schedule offences of the Anti-Corruption Commission, 2004 during pendency of inquiry and/or investigating is debarred from leaving the country and the passport is impounded/seized in an emergency situation without showing any cause and hearing, the Anti-Corruption Commission and/or the investigating officer shall submit an application before the Court of Senior Special Judge/Special Judge for post-approval of the memo of the restraining order and the act of the seizure of the passport as early as possible preferably within 15(fifteen) days from the date of passing the impugned memo as well as from the date of seizing the passport as the case may be.
That the Senior Special Judge/Special Judge having received the application from the Commission if any shall notify the person/accused of cognizable offences and upon hearing the parties may pass necessary order approving or disapproving the memo of restraining order and act of seizure of the passport.
That the learned Special Judge will hear and dispose of the application of the Commission if any as early as possible preferably within 60(sixty) days from the date of receipt of such application providing a fair opportunity of being heard to the aggrieved/parties/persons/ accused.

The aggrieved person/accused shall submit his address, mobile phone and e-mail number to the Commission so that the Commission can communicate with them for any assistance and co-operation if required for the purposes of inquiry and/or investigation and they may appear before the Commission following the reasonable timeframe given by the Commission.
The aggrieved person/accused shall appear before the Commission if asked for to appear before it on the stipulated date fixed by the Commission failing which the matter will be dealt with in accordance with law."
9. The High Court Division also directed the writ respondents with whom the passport of the writ petitioner is lying to return the passport to him so that he can continue his studies going abroad and to allow him to go abroad without any hindrance. Against the said judgment and order, the Commission has preferred instant Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1523 of 2021.

10. Mr AM Aminuddin, learned Attorney-General appeared on behalf of the petitioner in Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos.1009 of 2021, 1184 of 2021, 1340 of 2021 and 1523 of 2021 (He did not appear in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.605 of 2020 since he appeared on behalf of the writ petitioner in Writ Petition No.13300 of 2019 in the High Court Division). Mr AM Fazlul Haque appeared on behalf of the petitioner in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1523 of 2021. Mr Khurshid Alam Khan, learned Advocate appeared for the petitioner in all the civil petitions.

11. On the other hand, Mr Mohammad Arsadur Rouf, learned Advocate appeared for the writ petitioner respondent in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.605 of 2020, Mr Probir Neogi, learned Senior Counsel appeared for the writ petitioner-respondent No.1 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1009 of 2021. Mr AM Mahbubuddin, learned Advocate appeared for the respondent No.1 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1184 of 2021, Mr Ruhul Quddus, learned Advocate appeared for the respondent No.1 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1340 of 2021 and Mr Murad Reza, learned Advocate appeared on behalf of the respondent No.1 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1523 of 2021.

12. The submissions of the learned Attorney-General, Mr Khurshid Alam Khan and Mr AKM Fazlul Haque, learned Advocates are identical. They submit that the right of freedom of movement as guaranteed under Article 36 of the Constitution is not absolute right and said provision provides specifically that subject to any reasonable restriction imposed by law in the public interest, every citizen shall have the right to move freely throughout Bangladesh, to reside and settle in any place therein and to leave and re-enter Bangladesh. They submit that in view of the words, "subject to any reasonable restriction imposed by law in the public interest", clearly permitted the Government/Commission to impose some restrictions on the movement which are legitimate. In their submissions, learned Attorney-General and Advocates for the petitioner relied upon the preamble of Anti-Corruption Commission Act and Sections 17 and 19 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act. They submit that in order to restrain/obstruct any citizen to leave and re-enter Bangladesh the Commission is authorized to pass necessary order or orders otherwise the object of the Act should be frustrated.

13. On the other hand, all the learned Counsel who appear for the writ petitioner-respondents submit that in view of the provision of Article 36 of the Constitution reasonable restrictions may be imposed to leave and re-enter Bangladesh but the same must be made by law and for public interest, which are absent in all the impugned orders. There is no provision in Anti-Corruption Commission Act authorising the Commission to impose any embargo to move freely throughout Bangladesh and to reside and settle in any place therein and to leave and re-enter in Bangladesh. In absence of specific law, imposition of impugned embargoes upon the writ petitioner respondents were bad in law. They drew our attention to Article 13(1) and (2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations in December, 1948 which run as follows:

"Article 13(1) Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each state.
(2) Everyone has the right to leave any country including his own, and to return to his country."
14. They lastly submit that the impugned orders restraining the writ petitioners to leave Bangladesh were bad in law.

15. Freedom of movement, mobility right, or the right to travel is a human right concept encompassing the right of individuals to travel from place to place within the territory of a country and to leave the country and return to it (wikepedia). In 13th Century England, the Magna Carta guaranteed local and foreign merchants the right, subject to some exceptions, to go away from England, come to England, stay and go through England. In Australia O' Connor J. said in Potter vs Minahan [(1908) 7 CLR 277], that a citizen of Australia is entitled to 'depart from and re-enter Australia as he pleases without let or hindrnce unless some law of the Australian Community has in that respect decreed the contrary'. Freedom of movement is included in the compendious term "personal liberty". Freedom of movement is widely considered to be one of the most basic human rights and the same is in the last analysis the essence of personal liberty. However, this right is not absolute. Indeed, freedom is emancipatory in a number of senses. The concept is that the specified right of a citizen is controlled by necessary restrictions in the public interest. No extrinsic aid is needed to interpret the words used in Article 36 of the Constitution which, in our opinion, are not ambiguous. Expression to reasonable restrictions imposed by law must mean restrictions prescribed by the law of the State. The term law is the general sense means law enacted by the legislature. Article 36 of the Constitution provides that no person shall be deprived of his right to travel unless the same is restricted reasonably imposed by any law in the public interest. The executive instructions without having the sanction of any statutory power cannot be construed as law. An executive order without the support of valid law depriving a person of his personal liberty cannot be held valid. Learned Attorney-General and other Counsel for the leave petitioners relied upon the following provisions of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act. Section 17 runs as follows:

“১৭। কমিশনের কার্যাবলি - কমিশন নিম্নবর্ণিত সকল বা যে কোন কার্য সম্পাদন করিতে পারিবে, যথাঃ-
(ক) তফসিলে উল্লিখিত অপরাধসমূহের অনুসন্ধান ও তদন্ত পরিচালনা;
(খ) অনুচ্ছেদ (ক) এর অধীন অনুসন্ধান ও তদন্ত পরিচালনার ভিত্তিতে এই আইনের অধীন মামলা দায়ের ও পরিচালনা;
(গ) দুর্নীতি সম্পর্কিত কোন অভিযোগ স্বউদ্যোগে বা ক্ষতিগ্রস্ত ব্যক্তি বা তাহার পক্ষে অন্য কোন ব্যক্তি কর্তৃক দাখিলকৃত আবেদনের ভিত্তিতে অনুসন্ধান;
(ঘ) দুর্নীতি দমন বিষয়ে আইন দ্বারা কমিশনকে অর্পিত যে কোন দায়িত্ব পালন করা;
(ঙ) দুর্নীতি প্রতিরোধের জন্য কোন আইনের অধীন স্বীকৃত ব্যবস্থাদি পর্যালোচনা এবং কার্যকর বাস্তবায়নের জন্য রাষ্ট্রপতির নিকট সুপারিশ পেশ করা;
(চ) দুর্নীতি প্রতিরোধের বিষয়ে গবেষণা পরিকল্পনা তৈরি করা এবং গবেষণালব্ধ ফলাফলের ভিত্তিতে করণীয় সম্পর্কে রাষ্ট্রপতির নিকট সুপারিশ পেশ করা;
(ছ) দুর্নীতি প্রতিরোধের লক্ষ্যে সততা ও নিষ্ঠাবোধ সৃষ্টি করা এবং দুর্নীতির বিরুদ্ধে গণসচেতনতা গড়িয়া তোলার ব্যবস্থা করা;
(জ) কমিশনের কার্যাবলি বা দায়িত্বের মধ্যে পড়ে এমন সকল বিষয়ের উপর সেমিনার, সিম্পোজিয়াম, কর্মশালা, ইত্যাদির ব্যবস্থা করা;
(ঝ) আর্থ-সামাজিক অবস্থার প্রেক্ষিতে বাংলাদেশে বিদ্যমান বিভিন্ন প্রকার দুর্নীতির উৎস চিহ্নিত করা এবং তদনুসারে প্রয়োজনীয় ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণের জন্য রাষ্ট্রপতির নিকট সুপারিশ পেশ করা;
(ঞ) দুর্নীতির অনুসন্ধান, তদন্ত, মামলা দায়ের এবং উক্তরূপ অনুসন্ধান, তদন্ত ও মামলা দায়েরের ক্ষেত্রে কমিশনের অনুমোদন পদ্ধতি নির্ধারণ করা; এবং
(ট) দুর্নীতি প্রতিরোধের জন্য প্রয়োজনীয় বিবেচিত অন্য যে কোন কার্য সম্পাদন করা।”
Section 19 runs as follows:

“১৯। অনুসন্ধান বা তদন্তকার্যে কমিশনের বিশেষ ক্ষমতা –(১) দুর্নীতি সম্পর্কিত কোন অভিযোগের অনুসন্ধান বা তদন্তের ক্ষেত্রে, কমিশনের নিম্নরূপ ক্ষমতা থাকিবে, যথাঃ-
(ক) [সাক্ষীর প্রতি নোটিশ] জারি ও উপস্থিতি নিশ্চিতকরণ এবং [***] সাক্ষীকে জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করা;
(খ) কোন দলিল উদঘাটন এবং উপস্থাপন করা;
(গ) সাক্ষ্য গ্রহণ;
(ঘ) কোন আদালত বা অফিস হইতে পাবলিক রেকর্ড বা উহার অনুলিপি তলব করা;
(ঙ) সাক্ষীর জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ এবং দলিল পরীক্ষা করার জন্য [নোটিশ] জারি করা; এবং
(চ) এই আইনের উদ্দেশ্য পূরণকল্পে, নির্ধারিত অন্য যে কোন বিষয়।
(২) কমিশন, যে কোন ব্যক্তিকে অনুসন্ধান বা তদন্ত সংশ্লিষ্ট বিষয়ে কোন তথ্য সরবরাহ করিবার জন্য নির্দেশ দিতে পারিবে এবং অনুরূপভাবে নির্দেশিত ব্যক্তি তাহার হেফাজতে রক্ষিত উক্ত তথ্য সরবরাহ করিতে বাধ্য থাকিবেন।
(৩) কোন কমিশনার বা কমিশন হইতে বৈধ ক্ষমতাপ্রাপ্ত কোন কর্মকর্তাকে উপ-ধারা (১) এর অধীন ক্ষমতা প্রয়োগে কোন ব্যক্তি বাধা প্রদান করিলে বা উক্ত উপ-ধারার অধীন প্রদত্ত কোন নির্দেশ ইচ্ছাকৃতভাবে কোন ব্যক্তি অমান্য করিলে উহা দণ্ডনীয় অপরাধ হইবে এবং উক্ত অপরাধের জন্য সংশ্লিষ্ট ব্যক্তি অনূর্ধ্ব ৩ (তিন) বৎসর পর্যন্ত যে কোন মেয়াদের কারাদণ্ডে বা অর্থদণ্ডে বা উভয় প্রকার দণ্ডে দণ্ডনীয় হইবেন।”

16. Learned Attorney-General specifically drawing our attention to the preamble and provisions of Section 17(Ta) and 19(Cha) of the Act, submits that object of the Act is to curb corruption in the country and to resist corrupt practice. With an object to implement the ultimate goal, the Commission can take steps so that corrupt people could not leave the country for avoiding legal action/actions brought or to be brought against him.

17. The freedom of movement is subject to reasonable restrictions owing to the rationale that for the society in an orderly manner, people cannot exercise their rights in such a manner which is injurious to the society as a whole because if it is done, it will lead to complete chaos and destroy the basic prerequisite needed for the enjoyment of civil liberties. The rationale behind incorporating reasonable restrictions has been discussed to a great extent in the case of AK Gopalan vs State of Madras (AIR 1950 SC 27). It was observed that reasonable restrictions are imposed on the enjoyment of fundamental rights due to the fact that in certain circumstances, individual liberty has to be subordinated to certain other larger interests of the society.

18. The freedom to travel, like all other freedom couched in universal terms, however, has never remained absolute untrammelled in any state or society. The right of free movement whether within the country or across its frontier, either in going out or coming in is a personal liberty and the same is not intended to bear the narrow interpretation of freedom from physical restrain. The right to travel abroad cannot be deprived unless reasonable restriction is imposed by law in the public interest. Such restriction must be by law and must be reasonably needed in the public interest [Shapiro vs Thompsos (1969) 394 US 618]. Freedom of movement is basic in our scheme of values. Freedom of travel is indeed an important aspect of the citizen's liberty. William Blackstone characterized the right to leave as part of the common law right to personal liberty. No person can be deprived of his right to go abroad unless appropriate authority exercising its lawful power imposed restriction upon him. If a person's fundamental right under Article 36 is infringed, the State can rely upon a law to sustain the action.

19. All rights in an organized society are relative rather than absolute. With respect to the ambit of reasonable restrictions, the legislative view of what constitute reasonable restriction shall not be conclusive and final and that it shall be subjected to supervision by the Court. It is the duty of the Court to see whether the individual crosses the "Lakshman Rekha" that is carved out by law is dealt appropriately (Dharmendra Kirthal vs State of UP AIR 2013 SC 2569). Most basic rule while testing whether a law falls within the ambit of reasonable restriction is that no general or abstract rule shall be adopted for .the application of all cases. Reasonable implies intelligent care and the deliberation. The legislation which arbitrarily or expressively invests the right cannot be set to contend the quality of reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance between the freedom guarantee. The restrictions imposed shall have a direct or proximate nexus with the object which the legislature seeks to achieve and the restriction so imposed must not be excessive of the said object.

20. Freedom of movement as envisaged in our Constitution is not absolute meaning thereby that the same is subject to certain limitation. Despite the long standing ideal of free movement, it has in practice always been subject to state restrictions. The right to leave one's country has never been considered as absolute right. The requirement of restriction to be reasonable means that the High Court Division has the power to Judge the reasonableness of restrictions in question. The reasonableness demands proper balancing of the fundamental rights of the people. It is the judiciary which has to finally judge the reasonableness of restriction. The restriction can be imposed by law only not an executive order (Chintanmon Rao vs State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1951 SC 118).

21. Under Article 36 of the Constitution freedom of movement is one of the fundamental rights guaranteed to every citizen of the country which can not be abridged or denied arbitrarily on mere liking disliking without any specific law authorizing lawful justification for this purpose. The reasonableness is to be determined by an objective standard and not subjective one.

22. The extent to which this right would be exercised may be limited by the law promulgated by the legislatures. Parliament may by law impose restrictions on such freedom in the public interest and the said law can be made by virtue of any entry with respect whereof parliament has power to make a law. The right to freedom of movement includes the right to move freely within a country for those who are lawfully within the country. The right to leave any country and the right to enter a country of which he is a citizen such right may be restricted in certain circumstances. Considering the need to maintain a balance between the freedom of the individual and the general welfare of the community, reasonable restrictions may be imposed on the enjoyment of the right by or under the authority of law. Indian Supreme Court in the case of Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India reported in AIR 1978 (SC) 597 held, by majority, that it must be "right and just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive; otherwise, it should be no procedure at all and the requirement of Article 21 would not be satisfied." By a law a reasonable restriction may be put on the movement of a citizen or he may even be externed from one place of the country, but he can not be externed from the country. In the case of Razendrum vs RK Mishra reported in (2010) 1 SSC page 457 it was observed that detention by Airport intelligence authorities of an air passenger travelling with huge amount of cash is not violative of the freedom of movement as the right of any person to carry money is subject to verification or seizure by intelligence authority to ensure that the said money is not intended for illegal activities. The possession and enjoyment of all rights, as was observed by the Supreme Court of America in Jacobson vs Massachusetts, (1904)197 US 643 are subject to such reasonable conditions as may be deemed by the governing authority of the country essential to the safety, health, peace, general order and morals of the community.

23. In the case of MH Devendrappa vs The Karnataka SSI Corporation reported in AIR 1998 SC 1064; i was observed that fundamental freedom are not necessarily mutually supportive; some restrictions on one right may be necessary to protect other rights in a given situation and proper exercise of rights may have, implicit in them; certain restrictions. For this the rights must be harmoniously construed so that they are properly promoted with the minimum of such implied and necessary restrictions.

24. The provision provided in Article 36 safeguard the right to go abroad against executive interference which is not supported by law; and law here means ‘inacted law.' No person can be deprived of his right to go abroad unless there is a law made by the State for so depriving him and the deprivation is effected strictly in accordance with law. In the exercise of his rights and freedom, everyone shall be subject only to such limitations as are determined by law. In an organized society, there can be no absolute liberty without social control. Liberty is not unbridled licence. Some restrictions on freedom of movement are legitimate if imposed for limited purposes in a fair and non-discriminatory manner. Limitations on the freedom is justified but the limits must generally be reasonable, prescribed by law, and demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society. It was what Edmund Burke called ‘regulated Freedom'. Freedoms if absolute would always, be detrimental to the smooth functioning of the, society as the individual interests of all individuals would be priorised. The State can truncate the enjoyment of the freedoms through law. The protection of the collective is the bone marrow and that is why liberty in a civilized society, cannot be absolute. There cannot be any such thing as absolute or uncontrolled liberty wholly freed from restraint, for that would lead to anarchy and disorder. The language of Article 36, clearly indicates that the protection it secures is limited one. In no case may a person be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter his or her own country, and that there are few, if any, circumstances in which deprivation of the right to enter a person's own country could be considered reasonable. Legislation which arbitrarily or excessively invades the right cannot be a proper balance between the freedom guaranteed and the general welfare.

25. With the discussion made above, it is observed:—

The fundamental right guaranteed under Article 36 of the Constitution is non-absolute right. The right to leave one's country has therefore never been considered an absolute right. The right may be restricted in certain circumstances.
Article 36 of the Constitution permits imposition of restrictions. However, such restrictions must be by way of the law enacted and must be reasonably needed in the public interest.

Without backing of law imposition of restriction on the freedom of movement by an executive order will be unconstitutional.
The legislative view of what constitute reasonable restriction shall not be conclusive and final and that it shall be subjected to supervision by the Court.

B. A. restriction in order to be referred to as reasonable shall not be arbitrary and shall not be beyond what is required in the interest of the public. The restriction imposed shall have a direct or proximate nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the law.

Freedoms if absolute would always be detrimental to smooth functioning of the society. Reasonableness demands proper balancing.

The right to leave the country and to possess a passport may be restricted, most notably if the person's presence is required due to their having been charged with a criminal offence. However, merely because a person is involved in a criminal case, he is not denude of his fundamental rights.

Restriction may be imposed on travel in order to prevent exit from the country by persons who leave quickly to avoid due process of law. However, this would be subject to confirmation by the appropriate Court within a period of 3 working days.
With the observations made above, all the petitions are disposed of.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===74 DLR (AD) 11=== ===10 CLR (AD) 27=== ===16 SCOB (AD) 62=== ===24 ALR (AD) 15=== ===18 ADC (AD) 593===
Appellate Division 
(Criminal)
Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman
Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan

Criminal Appeal No.127 of 2014
With
Jail Appeal No.26 of 2014
and
Jail Appeal No.29 of 2014.

(From the judgment and order dated 11-5-2014 passed by the High Court Division in Death Reference No.07 of 2009 with Criminal Appeal Nos.616, 670 and 698 of 2009 with Jail Appeal Nos.155-159 of 2009).

Shukur Ali (Md) and another
... Appellants [In Crl. A. No.127 of 2014]
Mamun
... Appellant [In Jail Appeal No.26 of 2014]
Sentu and another
... Appellants [In Jail Appeal No.29 of 2014]
VS
State
... Respondent [In all the appeals]

Judgement Date : August 18, 2021

Counsels:
SM Shahjahan, Advocate with Ragib Rouf Chowdhury, Advocate, instructed by Shahanara Begum, Advocate-on-Record
— For the appellants. (In Crl Appeal No.127 of 2014)

SM Aminul Islam, Advocate
— For the appellants. (In Jail Appeal Nos.26 & 29 of 2014)

Biswajit Debnath, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed by Madhu Malati Chowdhury Barua, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent. (In all the appeals)

Judgment
Obaidul Hassan, J: This Criminal Appeal No.127 of 2014 with Jail Appeal Nos.26 and 29 of 2014 is directed against the judgment and order dated 11-5-2014 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Death Reference No.07 of 2009 with Criminal Appeal Nos.616, 670 and 698 of 2009 with Jail Appeal Nos.155- 159 of 2009 accepting the Death Reference while dismissing all the appeal and thereby upholding the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 4-2-2009 passed by the learned Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal, Kushtia (hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal/trial Court) in Nari-o Shishu Nirjatan Case No.147 of 2004 arising out of Daulatpur Police Station Case No.26 dated 27-3- 2004 corresponding to GR No.69 of 2004 convicting the appellants under section 9(3) of the Nari-o- Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the Ain, 2003) and sentenced them to death by hanging and to pay a fine of Taka 1,00,000 each.

2. The prosecution case, in short, is that one Md Abdul Aziz alias Jhunu, father of the deceased Sabina Khatun lodged First Information Report (shortly, the FIR) with Daulatpur Police Station. Alleging that on the evening of 25-3-2004 his daughter Sabina Khatun (13) went to the house of neighbour Muna Mondal to watch television. As she did not return home, the inmates of Sabina's house went to the said residence to search for Sabina. One Rubina, wife of Azanur told them that the victim went away from their residence just after evening. They also looked for Sabina in every house of the village, but could not trace her. On 27-3-2004 at about 05-30 pm the informant came to know that a dead body has been found in the field of Lalnagar. Being informed, the informant, his wife, Hasina; daughter, Bedana; son, Mulluk Chand; along with other villagers, went to the place of occurrence and saw the naked dead body of Sabina Khatun, her mouth was fastened with her orhna. They saw several injury marks on her chest, both the thighs and sharp cutting injury on her private organ. Her body was partially decomposed and spreading bad smell. Later on, they came to know that one Samad first saw the dead body at the place of occurrence where he went to pluck buds of tobacco flowers. The informant suspected that the accused Mamun, Azanur, Sentu and others had raped and killed his daughter. On the basis of the said first information lodged by the informant, Daulatpur Police Station Case No.26 dated 27-3-2004 corresponding to GR No.69 of 2004 under section 9(3) of the Ain, 2000 was started.

3. Officer-in-Charge Md Faruk Ahmmed started to investigate the case. On his transfer Sub-Inspector (SI), Md Nabir Hossen investigated the case and finally when SI Md Nabir Hossain was transferred SI Md Mosaddek Hossen Khan completed the investigation and submitted charge-sheet. The investigating officer visited the place of occurrence and prepared the Inquest Report of the dead body in the presence of witnesses, prepared the sketch map with index, seized the alamats and examined the witnesses under section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. He duly sent the body of the deceased to the Kushtia General Hospital for Post-mortem. The post-mortem examination of the victim was done by a group of doctors, they were Dr. Ashok Kumar Saha, Dr. Arbinda Pal, Dr. Saleh Ahmmed and Dr. Abdus Salam. Ultimately, on conclusion of investigation of the case, the Investigating Officer submitted charge sheet being No.108 dated 25-7-2004 against the accused Azanur Rahman, Mamun, Shukur, Kamu (Kamrul) and Sentu under section 9(3) of the Ain, 2000.

4. Later, the case was duly sent to the Tribunal for trial. The learned Judge of the Tribunal on taking cognizance of the offence against the accused persons under section 9(3) of the Ain, 2000 framed charge against them. On being read over and explained the charge to the accused persons, they pleaded not guilty and asked for a trail.

5. On the closure of the evidence of the prosecution witnesses, the convict-appellants were examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 whereupon they pleaded innocence. They informed the Tribunal that they would not adduce any evidence on their behalf.

6. The defence case as it appears from the trend of cross-examination is that the appellants are innocent and have been falsely implicated in this case out of enmity and personal grudge and the accused appellants are not involved with the offence of committing rape on the deceased Sabina, and murdering her. The accused Sentu, son of Tizabuddin, is the brother of Montu. Sentu is not named in the FIR. It is also the case of the defence is that from the date of occurrence the accused persons were very much present in the locality and they did not flee-away. The victim was not at all subjected to the commission of rape by the appellants. The confessional statements of accused Mamun and Azanur are not true and voluntary. Owing to merciless torture and enticement of the police the accused persons were compelled to give involuntary confessional statements.

7. During the course of trial, the prosecution produced as many as 18 witnesses including the Medical Officer and the Investigating Officer. The trial Court after considering the evidence and materials on record found the accused persons Sentu, Mamun, Azanur Rahman, Shukur and Kamu (Kamrul) guilty under section 9(3) of the Ain, 2000 and sentenced them to death by its judgment and order dated 4-2- 2009.

8. Death sentence proceeding has been submitted to the High Court Division by way of Reference by the Tribunal and the Reference has been noted as Death Reference No.07 of 2009. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Tribunal, the convicts Shukur, Kamu alias Kamrul and Sentu preferred Criminal Appeal No.616 of 2009, convict Azanur Rahman preferred Criminal Appeal No.670 of 2009, convict Mamun preferred Criminal Appeal No.698 of 2009 before the High Court Division. Convict Mamun, Azanur Rahman, Md Shukur Ali, Kamu alias Kamrul and Sentu presented petition of appeals from jail, which have been numbered as Jail Appeal Nos.155, 156, 157, 158 and 159 of 2009 and the same were heard with Death Reference No.07 of 2009.

9. The High Court Division by .its judgment and order dated 11-5-2014 accepted the Death Reference and dismissed all the Criminal Appeals and Jail Appeals affirming the judgment and order passed by the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal, Kushtia.

10. Being aggrieved by, and dissatisfied with the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the High Court Division dated 11-5-2014, the convict-appellants, namely, Md Shukur Ali, Sentu, Mamun and Azanur Rahman preferred Criminal Appeal with Jail Appeal before this Division.

11. Mr SM Shahjahan, the learned advocate appearing along with Mr Raghib Rouf Chowdhury, the learned Advocate, appearing for the appellants in Criminal Appeal No.127 of 2014, Mr SM Aminul Islam, the learned advocate, appearing for the appellants in Jail Appeal Nos.26 and 29 of 2014, have taken us through the FIR, the inquest report, the post-mortem report, the charge-sheet, testimonies of the witnesses, the judgment and order passed by the Tribunal and the appellate Court (High Court Division), connected materials on record and submit that the High. Court Division failed to consider that the judgment and order of conviction is bad in law as well as in facts and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They further submit that the High Court Division failed to consider that the judgment and order of conviction is based on surmise and conjecture and not on legal evidence and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They also submit that the High Court Division failed to consider that the judgment and order of conviction has been passed by the Tribunal without applying its' judicial mind as the case was not proved by the prosecution witnesses beyond reasonable doubt and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They next submit that during trail the prosecution examined as many as 18 prosecution witnesses, but all the witnesses disowned the prosecution case and none of the witnesses witnessed the occurrence and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. Moreover, they submit that there is no evidence against the appellants except inculpatory confessional statements made by co-accused, but the same cannot be used against the appellants without corroboration and cannot' be basis of conviction and it is not an evidence as per section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They added that the High Court Division failed to consider that in the judgment and order of conviction passed by the learned Judge of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Tribunal it was not considered that out of 18 witnesses PWs 10 and 11 deposed about the searching of the appellants, but their evidence was not supported by PWs 1, 11, 6, 13 and they deposed that at the time of occurrence three witnesses were present, but PWs 1, 2, 6 and PW 13 did not support this story. Rather those evidence were contradicted by PWs 6 and 13, PW 6 in his cross-examination stated that "আমি আসামীদের সন্দেহ করি না" and PW 13 in his cross-examination stated that "আসামীদের বাড়িতে আমরা কেহ যাই নাই।" So it appears that there is no circumstantial evidence against the appellants and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They also submit that the High Court Division failed to consider that in passing the judgment and order of conviction, the learned Judge of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Tribunal did not consider that the confessional statement must be left out of consideration as it was contradicted by medical evidence. The absence of spermatozoa in the private organ of the deceased throws doubt on the prosecution story of rape. They also submitted that the doctor stated that the cause of death was strangulation, but confession do not disclose the same and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. Besides, they submit that there is no evidence against the appellants except confession of co-accused which is not substantial evidence in convicting appellants without any other corroborative evidence, moreover it appears from the record that the victim went to watch television in a house, but the owner of that house was not examined and the witnesses Kanchan and Hasina and other witnesses did not disclose the name of the appellants in their evidence and the circumstantial evidence also did not prove the involvement of the appellants and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. They again submitted that the confession of accused Mamun and Azanur Rahman were not made voluntarily and those are not true as no certificate was issued by the statement recording Magistrate in this regard and, as such, the said confession is a nullity in the eye of law and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set aside.

12. They further submit that the allegation against the appellants does not come under section 9(3) of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Ain, 2000 as the doctor opined that the death was due to asphyxia as a result of above mentioned injuries, caused by strangulation which was ante-mortem and homicidal in nature with rape, but the rape was not proved by any other evidence including medical certificate and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction is liable to be set-aside. Finally, they submit that the learned Magistrate recorded confessional statement of the two accused, but did not follow the prescribed procedure as mentioned in section 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and, as such, the confessional statements are not admissible evidence resulting a judgment invalid.

13. Mr Biswajit Debnath, the learned Deputy Attorney-General, appearing for the respondent-the State, made his submissions supporting the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division and prays for dismissal of the appeal.

14. Now, to ascertain whether the prosecution has been able to prove the charge against the appellant Md Shukur Ali, Mamun, Sentu and Azanur Rahman, let us examine and analyze the depositions of the witnesses adduced by the prosecution.

15. PW 1, the informant Abdul Aziz @ Jhunu deposed that they saw several injury marks on the body of the deceased and the dead body was partially decomposed. He further stated that they suspected the involvement of accused Azanur, Mamun, Sentu and others as they were missing since the occurrence of the crime.

16. During cross-examination he stated that he heard that deceased had gone to watch television. The occurrence took place in the evening of Thursday and they found the dead body on Saturday afternoon. The informant and others suspected that the accused Mamun, Azanur, Sentu and others had raped and killed his daughter. The police prepared the inquest report before filing of the case. He identified the FIR and his thump impression.

17. PW 2, Rokeya Khatun, wife of Nuna (Muna), a neighbour of the deceased, stated that around 8-00 pm Sabina's father told her that Sabina was missing. She heard that dead body of the deceased Sabina was found on Saturday afternoon and there were some marks of injury on her body.

18. The cross-examination of the witness was declined by the defence.

19. PW 3, Kanchon (Kazoli), stated that the dead body of the deceased was found from a Tobacco field of Dharonggari and there were injury marks on her body.

20. The cross-examination of the witness was declined by the defence.

21. PW 4, Hasina Khatun, the mother of deceased Sabina, stated that on the date of occurrence the deceased Sabina went to the house of Muna to watch television. They searched for her as she did not return home. Two days after the occurrence, they found the naked dead body of the deceased in a tobacco field. There were several injury marks on her body and her orhna was wrapped round her face over her mouth.

22. During cross-examination she stated that she heard from local people that accused Azanur and Mamun had been arrested.

23. PW 5, Md Fazlur Rahman, deposed that after returning home from Allardarga he heard hue and cry from the field and also heard a dead body was found, he informed the police and went to the place of occurrence with the police. He saw the dead body in the tobacco field. The police prepared the inquest report and his signature so endorsed thereon and marked as Exhibits-1 and 1/1 respectively.

24. The defence declined to cross-examine this witness.

25. PW 6, Rahidul Islam, deposed that he heard about the disappearance of Sabina and subsequently after two days the dead body was found from a tobacco field. He also heard that accused Azanur and Mamun were arrested. He heard that accused Kamrul, Shukur and Sentu were also with them.

26. PW 7, Bishoyot Ali, deposed that he heard about the disappearance of Sabina and subsequently her dead body was found. He stated that he went to place of occurrence with police and saw the dead body. His signature so endorsed in the inquest report, has been marked as Exh-1/2.

27. The cross-examination of the witness was declined by the defene.

28. PW 8, Helal Uddin, deposed that he went to the tobacco field and saw the dead body of deceased Sabina. He identified his signature on the inquest report which was marked as Exhibit. 1/3.

29. The defence had declined to cross-examine the witness.

30. PW 9, Abdul Goni, father of accused Kamrul, deposed that the inquest report was prepared in his presence and his signature so endorsed thereon has been marked as Exhibit-1/4.

31. The cross-examination of the witness was declined by the defence.

32. PW 10, Md Mulluk Chand, deposed regarding the date, time and place of occurrence. He stated that before the occurrence the deceased went to the dwelling house of neighbour Muna Mondal to watch Television and went missing. They searched for the deceased at different places. They suspected the involvement of the accused Azanur, Mamun; Shukur, Sentu and Kamrul. He identified the accused persons in the dock of the court. He deposed that they did not find the accused persons at their houses on that day and because of this reason they suspected their involvement with the occurrence. He deposed that on March 27, 2008 the dead body of the deceased was found from the tobacco field of Dharonggari. They saw the naked dead body having several injuries on it. He heard that .the accused Amur and Mamun had been arrested at Kushtia. Accused Mamun and Azanur made confessional statements.

33. During cross-examination, he stated that they had searched the respective houses of the five accused. He denied defence suggestion that out of enmity and grudge the accused persons had been implicated in the instant case.

34. PW 11, Alauddin, stated that the accused Azanur, Mamun, Sentu, Kamrul and Shukur were also missing. He stated that the five accused persons also went to watch television. They searched for the deceased from door to door. He stated that they saw the naked dead body of the deceased with several injuries which was found on March 27, 2004 at about 05-30 pm lying in the tobacco field of Dharonggari. He stated that after being arrested the accused' Manum and Azanur admitted their guilt to the police.

35. During cross-examination, he stated that his father-in-law told him that the accused had gone to watch television. He deposed that they searched for the deceased at many houses including the houses of the accused persons. He stated that the accused persons were inhabitants of the same village.

36. PW 12, Zabed Ali, stated that on March 25, 2007 at about 6-00/7-00 pm the deceased went to the neighbour's house 'to watch television and thereafter went missing. He searched for the deceased at different houses. On hearing being found a dead body, he went to the place of occurrence on March 27, 2004 and saw the naked dead body of the deceased with several injuries.

37. The defence declined to cross-examine this witness.

38. PW 13, Md Zainal Haque, had' been declared hostile and was cross-examined by the prosecution and he deposed that at the time of searching for the deceased accused Azanur, Shukur, Mamun, Sentu and Kamrul were not with the villagers.

39. PW 14, Dr. Ashok Kumar Saha, deposed that on March 28, 2004 he was performing his duty at General Hospital, Kushtia as Emergency Medical Officer. A Medical Board was constituted consisting 4 members where he was the president and. Other three members were Dr. Arbinda Pal, Dr. Saleh Ahmed and Dr. A. Salam. After conducting the Autopsy the Board noted their findings as under:

Body partially decomposed and distended with Maggot formation with loss Of epidermis with burst abdomen with expulsion of coils of intestine.
One continuous ligature mark at the middle of the throat size 1" in breadth with knot, a tie.
One incised penetrating injury on front of the right side of the chest, size 2" x ½" up to chest cavity.
Two incised penetrating injury on front of the left side of the chest, size 2" x ½" up to abdominal cavity:
Four incised penetrating injury on anterior abdominal wall, size 2½" x 1½" up to abdominal cavity.
One incised penetrating injury on inner aspect of left thigh up size 1½" x 1½" x 2/3".
One incised injury on inner aspect of right thigh up, size 2½"" x 2/3".
One lacerated injury in vagina on right all size 1"x 1" mucus membrane.
40. On dissection: Anti-mortem blood clot and tissue laceration and congestion were seen associated with the injured/places stated above trachea congested both lung are injured, liver injured, stomach injured. Brain is soften. High vaginal swab was taken and sent for pathological examination for spermatozoa. But no spermatozoa was found.

41. After conclusion of the autopsy the Doctors opined as under:

"In our opinion the cause of death was due to asphyxia as a result of above mentioned injuries, caused by strangulation which were ante-mortem and homicidal in nature with rape".
42. This witness proved the post-mortem report and his signature so endorsed thereon and marked as Exhibits-2 and 2/1 respectively. He also identified the signatures of Dr. Arbinda, Dr. Saleh Ahammad and Dr. Abdus Salam which were marked as Exhibits- 2/2, 2/3 and 2/4 respectively.

43. During cross-examination he deposed that they found evidence of rape on the dead body. He further deposed that they found the injury in the inner part of the vagina of the deceased which may have been caused due to rape.

44. PW 15, Md Nabirul Islam, stated that when he was on duty on March 29, 2004 as 1st Class Magistrate at Kushtia Collectorate, he recorded the confessional statement of accused Azanur and Mamun under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and he followed the provisions of section 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. He found the confessional statements of the accused were true and voluntary. He proved the confessional statements and his signature so endorsed thereon and marked as. Exhibits-3, 3/1, 3/2, 3/3 and 3/4 respectively. His signature and signature of the accused were marked as Exhibits-4, 4/1, 4/2, 4/3 and 4/4 respectively.

45. PW 16, Md Nabir Hossen, stated that on April 04, 2004 he took the charge of investigation of the case on transfer of the Officer-in-Charge Faruk Ahmmed and perused the case docket, autopsy report. Subsequently, he handed over the CD to SI Musaddek on his transfer.

46. The cross-examination of the witness was declined by the defence.

47. PW 17, Md Mosaddek Hossen Khan, deposed that as the final Investigating Officer he took the charge of investigation of the case on April 22, 2004. He perused the case docket including sketch map, index, deposition of witnesses and confessional statements of the accused Mamun and Azanur. He recorded statements of some witnesses. He submitted charge-sheet No.108 dated July 07, 2004 against the accused persons finding prima facie ingredients of crime.

48. During cross-examination he deposed that he compared the confessional statements of the accused persons with autopsy report.

49. PW 18, Faruk Ahmmed is one of the three Investigating Officers of the case. He stated that on oral presentation of the informant he wrote the FIR. He also identified the thumb impression of the informant. He prepared the inquest report of the deceased, his signature so endorsed thereon has been marked as Exhibits-1 and 5/1 respectively. He stated that he sent the FIR for recording. He also deposed that he as Officer-in-Charge signed the FIR as Exhibit-5 and he identified his signature thereon as Exhibit- 5/1. He also stated that Mosharrof Hossain as duty officer filled up the FIR form as Exhibit-6 and he identified his signature thereon as Exhibit-6/l. He took up the case for investigation; visited the place of occurrence; prepared sketch-map thereof with index and his signature so endorsed thereon has been marked as Exhibits-7, 7/1, 8 and 8/1 respectively. He duly sent the dead body to the morgue for autopsy. He deposed that the mouth of the victim was fastened with orhna. He recorded the statement of 4 witnesses. He arrested accused Azanur, Mamun and Sentu and produced them to the learned Magistrate for recording their confessional statements. He stated that the tobacco plants were three or four feet tall.

50. During cross-examination he stated that he did not seize blood stained mud of place of occurrence. He stated that he found some injures on the dead body of the deceased. He did not mark any apparent injury marks. He suspected that the deceased was murdered after commission of rape.

51. These are the witnesses adduced by the prosecution. On scrutinising the depositions of the witnesses, the features appeared that the deceased Sabina went to watch television to the neigh-bouring house and went missing. On searching, the naked dead body of the deceased was found in the tobacco field with marks of injuries on her chest, thigh and private organ. From the .post-mortem report, the cause of death was found due to asphyxia caused by strangulation which was ante-mortem and homicidal in nature with rape.

52. In the instant case, two appellants namely Mamun and Azanur Rahman made confessional statement before the Magistrate under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

53. The confessional statement of Mamun reads as follows:

“সাবিনাদের বাড়ি থেকে আমাদের বাড়ি এক কিলো দূরে। তিজার প্রামাণিক এর ছেলে সেন্টুর সাথে সাবিনার ভালবাসা ছিল। সাবিনার বান্ধবী কাঞ্চন (পিং-রবেজল মণ্ডল) কে সেন্টু বলে সাবিনাকে সাবিনাদের বাড়ির পাশের তামাকের ক্ষেতে ডেকে আনতে বলে। সেন্টুর সাথে তার বন্ধু কামু (পিং-গনি মাস্টার) ছিল। ২৫-৩-২০০৪ তারিখ বৃহস্পতিবার রাত ৭/৮ টার দিকে কাঞ্চন সাবিনাকে ডেকে এনে দিয়ে বাড়িতে চলে যায়। সাবিনা, সেন্টু ও কামু তামাক ক্ষেতের মধ্যে বসে গল্প করতে থাকে। রাত হওয়ায় তারা সাবিনাকে বাড়িতে রাখতে যায়। বাড়ির কাছে গিয়ে সাবিনাকে খোঁজাখুঁজি হচ্ছে জেনে আবার মাঠের মধ্যে নিয়ে আসে। সেন্টু সাবিনাকে বলে চল বিয়া করব। সে সেন্টু ও সাবিনাকে বসিয়ে রেখে কামু টাকা আনার নাম করে বাড়িতে যাওয়ার কথা বলে শুকুর (পিং-কইমুদ্দিন মণ্ডল) কে ডেকে আনে। কামু ও শুকুর আজানুর কে ডাকতে আসে। কামু আজানুরকে বলে চল মাঠের মধ্যে কাজ আছে। ওরা তিনজন এসে আমাকে ডাকে। বলি যাইতে পারব না। তারা পীড়াপীড়ি করায় তাদের সাথে গেলাম। ৪ জন সাবিনা ও সেন্টুর কাছে পৌঁছানোর পর কামু সাবিনার মুখ চেপে ধরে। সেন্টু সাবিনার ওড়না দিয়ে সাবিনার মুখ বাঁধে। শুকুর সাবিনাকে কাধে করে তামাকের ক্ষেতের মধ্যে আনে। সেন্টু সাবিনার দুই হাত চেপে ধরে রাখে। কামু মুখ চেপে ধরে। শুকুর সালোয়ার ও কামিজ টেনে ছিঁড়ে গা থেকে খুলে ফেলে। শুকুর সাবিনার সাথে খারাপ কাজ করে। শুকুরের হয়ে গেলে সে সাবিনার মুখ চেপে ধরে। তখন কামু সাবিনার সাথে খারাপ কাজ করে। শুকুর ও কামু দুই হাত ধরে রাখে। তখন সেন্টু সাবিনার সাথে খারাপ কাজ করে। সেন্টু উঠে দাঁড়ানোর পর আজানুর খারাপ কাজ করে। তারপর আমি খারাপ কাজ করি। আমি যখন করি তখন সাবিনা হাত পা এড়িয়ে দেয়। মনে হয় অজ্ঞান হয়ে গিয়েছিল। শুকুর তার কোমরের থেক চাকু বের করে। আমি ও আজানুর জিজ্ঞাসা করি চাকু কি করিবি? বলে খুন করে ফেলতে হবে। আমরা বাধা দিই। তখন আমাদের শুকুর লাথি মারে। আমরা একটু সরে গিয়ে চোখ ঢেকে ফেলি। শুকুর চাকু দিয়ে আরও কয়টি কোপ দেয় তা অন্ধকার বুঝতে পারিনি। সাবিনাকে ধর্ষণ করার পের যে যারমত পালিয়ে যাই।”
54. The confessional statement of Azanur Rahman reads as follows:

“২৫-৩-২০০৪ তারিখে রাত্রি ১১ টা সাড়ে ১১ টার দিকে আমাকে শুকুর ও কামু এসে ডাকে। বলে মাঠে যেতে হবে। বলি কেন? বলে কাজ আছে। পীড়াপীড়ি করে আমাকে নিয়ে মামুনের বাড়ীতে যায়। মামুনকেও ডেকে নয়। মাঠের মধ্যে গিয়ে আমি সেন্টু ও সাবিনাকে দেখি। তারা পাশাপাশি বসেছিল। আমি কামুর কাছে জানতে পারি কাঞ্চনের মাধ্যমে TV দেখার নাম করে সাবিনাকে কামু ও সেন্টু ডাকায় আনে। সাবিনাকে দিয়ে কাঞ্চন চলে যায়। আমাদের ডেকে আনার পর কামু হঠাৎ সাবিনার মুখ চেপে ধরে। সেন্টু সাবিনার ওড়না দিয়ে সাবিনার মুখ বেধে ফেলে। শুকুর, কামু ও সেন্টু মিলে সাবিনাকে পেড়ে ফেলে। শুকুর সাবিনার জামা পায়জামা টেনে ছিঁড়ে ন্যাংটা করে ফেলে। সেন্টু মুখ চেপে ধরে রাখে। দুই হাত চেপে ধরে কামু। শুকুর দুই পা দুই হাত ধরে সাবিনার সাথে খারাপ কাজ করে। শুকুরের হাতে বড় নখ আছে তা দিয়ে সাবিনার দুধে জোরে টান দেয়। শুকুরের কাজ হয়ে গেলে কামু সাবিনার উপর চড়ে খারাপ কাজ করতে থাকে। শুকুর গিয়ে মুখ চেপে ধরে। কামুর হয়ে যাওয়ার পর সেন্টু খারাপ কাজ করে। তখন কামু গিয়ে সাবিনার হাত দুইটা ধরে। তখন মেয়েটা আর নড়াচড়া করছিল না। সেন্টুর হয়ে যাওয়ার পর আমি দাড়িয়ে ছিলাম। আমাকে শুকুর খারাপ কাজ করতে বলে। তখন আমার প্যান্টের চেইন খুলে সাবিনার সাথে খারাপ কাজ করি। তারপর আমি ওঠার পর মামুনকে খারাপ কাজ করার জন্য শুকুর বলে। তখন মামুন খারাপ কাজ করে। সাবিনা সেন্টু খারাপ কাজ করার সময় থেকে গা এড়িয়ে দিয়ে অজ্ঞান হয়ে যায়। আমি এবং কামু যখন খারাপ কাজ করি তখন তার জ্ঞান ছিল না। সবার খারাপ কাজ হয়ে যাওয়ার পর শুকুর তার কোমর থেকে চাকু বের করে। চাকু হঠাৎ শাঁট করে। আমি বলি কি করছিস? সে বলে একে খুন করব। আমি বাধা দিই। তখন আমাকে গালি দিয়ে লাথি মারে। মামুন বাধা দিলে তাকেও লাথি মারে। আমরা ভয়ে একটু দূরে গিয়ে দাঁড়াই। শুকুর চাকু মারছে এই শব্দ শুনতে পাই। সাবিনা একবার শুধু উঁ করে শব্দ করে। তার কোন শব্দ পাইনি। শুকুর বলে বাড়ি যায়। আমরা ভয়ে পালিয়ে যাই। আমি আর মামুন একবারে গীব বাসে ঢাকা যাই। ঘুরে ফিরে কোন কাজ না পেয়ে এক দিনই রাত ৯ টার বাসে কুষ্টিয়া চালের বাণ্ডার এ আমার খালার বাড়ীতে যাই। পরে আমার ভাই এসে পুলিশের হাতে ধরিয়ে দেয়।”

55. In the inquest report regarding the marks of injury on the dead body of the deceased it has been mentioned that there were seven marks of injuries with sharp knife on her chest, 2 marks of injuries on her thighs and one mark of injury on her private organ and his mouth was fastened with orhna. It is also mentioned' that deceased was raped before murder.

56. The injuries found on the dead body of the deceased after autopsy, have been mentioned in the preceding paragraphs during discussion of the evidence of PW 14 the doctor, who held the post-mortem.

57. So, the nature of injuries found in the inquest report as well as in the post-mortem report and in the inculpatory confessional statements made by Mamun and Azanur Rahman corroborate one another. The inculpatory confessional statements of Mamun and Azanur Rahman vividly narrated the circumstances how they committed rape and thereafter killed the deceased. The confessional statements support the inquest report as well as the post-mortem report.

58. From the deposition of PW 15, Md Nabirul Islam, Magistrate, 1st Class, and on perusal of confessional statements, it appears that the statements were recorded by the learned Magistrate following all the provisions required by law to be followed at the time of recording the confessional statements. PW 15 stated that the confessional statements made by Mamun and Azanur were clone voluntarily and it was true. The appellants Mamun and Azanur made confessional statements incriminating themselves along with Shukur, Sentu and Kamrul. Now, the question arises whether the confessional statements of Mamun and Azanur can be used against Shukur and Sentu.

59. Section 30 of the Evidence Act, 1872 provides that as follows:

"30. When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other persons as well as against the person who makes such confession."
60. The ingredients of this section are that:

More persons than one are to be tried jointly for the same offence.
One of such persons has to make confessional statement affecting himself and others. and
Such confession can be taken into consideration by the Court against others as well as the maker of the confession.
61. In the instant case, the appellants Mamun and Azanur made inculpatory confessional statements which vividly narrated the crime committed by all of them. They made the inculpatory confessional statements incriminating themselves along with other co-accused and the defence failed to prove any personal enmity or grudge of Mamun and Azanur with the non-confessing appellants Shukur, Sentu and Kamu. Moreover, PWs 1, 10 and 11 gave evidence to the effect that they suspected the involvement of all the accused in the occurrence as they were missing after the occurrence and appellants Mamun and Azanur were arrested on such suspicion. In their confessional statements, both of them in a voice narrated the role played by themselves and other accused persons in the occurrence and there is no inconsistency in their statements which leads us to believe the confessional statements of Mamun and Azanur involving Shukur and Sentu in the said occurrence are true.

62. Moreover, the deposition of PWs 1, 10 and 11 regarding the absconding of Shukur and Sentu along with Mamun and Azanur after the occurrence took place, provides strong corroboration to the confessional statements of Mamun and Azanur. Besides, the post-mortem report and the depositions of the witnesses clearly it reveals that there was sign of rape on the victim girl and accordingly, the appellants Mamun and Azanur confessed about the role played by all of them at the time of committing rape. The confessional statements of Mamun and Azanur are not contradictory rather they in a voice categorically stated the acts committed by each of them.

63. It is true that there is no eye-witness in the instant case but the inculpatory, true and voluntary confessional statements of two accused and the circumstances particularly long absconding by Shukur and Sentu are so well, connected to indicate that those circumstances render no other hypothesis other than the involvement of the appellants Shukur, Sentu, Mamun and Azanur in the alleged rape and murder thereof.

64. In performing our duties, this court is charged with the task of not only assessing the facts against the law, but also considering the impacts of judgments that are pronounced and any assessment made on the overall justice system,.

65. With modern criminal justice mechanism, the right against self-incrimination is one that stands as a cornerstone. As such confessions by a co-accused are generally inadmissible against the accused in a concerned case. However, in our duties of administering justice, we are sometimes faced with a case that forces us to consider aspects of larger policy at play.

66. The balance between crime control and due process models of justice is such a consideration that requires reassessment with changing times and upon the fact of each case. The case before us is one of such a heinous crime, where measures of control are made far more necessary to ensure that justice can be brought to the victim in question, As such while due process is still of utmost importance: crime control considerations must be made as well.

67. As such, the considerations of the use of a co-accused's confession, where supported by corroborating evidence, in the face of an overwhelming presence of circumstantial evidence, must be made. In this instance, the accused's absconding prior to trial, suggests an intent to obstruct justice. Corroborative evidence presented by the prosecution shows that there is sufficient reason to suggest that the co-accused's accounts of the events are likely to be true. It is therefore, that this court is of the opinion that in order to pursue a model of crime control in this regard, this court is willing to admit, in such rare instances the confession of a co-accused as incriminating evidence against the other accused. Albeit such evidence is still circumstantial.

68. The principle of the right against self incrimination is also accompanied by the principle that upon silence on part of those incriminated adverse inferences may be drawn at any stage of the trial and pretrial procedures.

69. When the co-accused, Azanur and Mamun put forth their confessions, incriminating the accused Shukur and Sentu, they had the opportunity to present their accounts of the events in question. Their refusal to adduce defence witness and to give any statement, allows this Court to draw an adverse inference against them, in conjunction with the inferences drawn from the period of their absconding.

70. We hold that confessional statement of a co-accused can be used against others non-confessing accused if there is corroboration of that statement by other direct or circumstantial evidence. In the instant case, the makers of the confessional statements vividly have stated the role played by other co-accused in the rape incident and murder of the deceased which is also supported/corroborated by the inquest report, post-mortem report and by the depositions of the witnesses particularly the deposition of PWs 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 18 regarding the marks of injury on the body of the deceased. Every case should be considered in the facts and circumstances of that particular case. In light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the view that the confessional statement of a co-accused can be used for the purpose of crime control against other accused persons even if there is a little bit of corroboration of that confessional statement by any sort of evidence either direct or circumstantial. Thus, the accused namely Shukur and Sentu are equally liable like Azanur and Mamun for murdering the deceased after committing rape.

71. We are also of the view that confession of Azanur and Mamun and the inculpatory facts furnished by the circumstances appearing from the evidence as discussed above are incompatible with the innocence of the appellant Shukur and Sentu.

72. In consideration of the matters discussed above, we are of the view that the deceased Sabina was raped before murder. The post-mortem report shows that her death was due to asphyxia caused by strangulation which was ante-mortem and homicidal in nature with rape. The marks injuries found on her body as well as the discovery of .naked dead body which was supported by the witnesses i.e. PWs 1, 2, 4, 5, 10 and 11 clearly indicate .that she was raped before Murder. It is a strong circumstantial evidence that the deceased was raped before murder 'by the appellants.

73. In the light of the discussions we may conclude that the prosecution has been able to prove the charge against all the appellants beyond reasonable doubt and the Tribunal has rightly convicted and sentenced the appellants to death and the confirmation thereof by the High Court Division is justified. We find no cogent reason to interfere with the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division.

74. In the instant case, it is found that the deceased Sabina was a girl of 13 years and she had a relation with Sentu. On the date of occurrence, the deceased went to meet with Sentu. At one moment Sentu along with other appellants, namely Shukur Ali, Mamun and Azanur to fulfill their nefarious desire raped Sabina and thereafter, Appellant Shukur Ali killed the deceased with a knife which he brought with him. Before killing, appellant Shukur Ali stabbed Sabina with the knife on the different parts of her body including on her private organ which resulted to her harrowing death.

75. Mr SM Shahjahan learned advocate appearing for the appellant Shukur lastly drew our attention regarding the age of the appellants and submits that Shukur Ali was very young at the time of offence, 'the other appellants were also of very tender age, considering their age the sentence of death may be reduced.

76. In this regard it is pertinent to mention the observation of his Lordship HL Dattu former Honorable Chief Justice of India & two other honorable judges of the Supreme Court made in the case of Mofil Khan vs State of Jharkhand, (2015) 1 SCC 67, Para-20 that "Sentences of severity are imposed to reflect the seriousness of the crime, to promote respect for the law, to provide just punishment for the offence, to afford adequate deterrent to criminal conduct and to protect the community from further similar conduct. It serves a threefold purpose-punitive, deterrent and protective."

77. Regarding appropriate punishment and sentence his Lordship Mr Justice P. Sathasivam, J. in the case of Ahmed Hussain Pali Mohammed Saiyed vs State of Gujarat, (2009) 7 SCC 254, Paras 99 & 100 observed that "Justice demands that courts should impose punishment befitting the crime so that the courts reflect public abhorrence of the crime. The court must not only keep in view the rights of the victim of the crime but the society at large while considering the imposition of appropriate punishment. The court will be failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is not awarded for a crime which has been committed not only against the individual victim but also against the society to which both the criminal and the victim belong."

78. We are of the view that undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence on the judiciary. It is the duty of the Court to award appropriate sentence considering the gravity of the offence. Considering the nature and gravity of the, offence committed by the appellant Shukur Ali, we are of the view that the cruelty and violence with which he killed Sabina, the ends of justice demands his death sentence.

79. From the Materials on record, it appears that the appellants Sentu, Mamun and Azanur are in the condemned cell for more then 12(twelve) years Suffering the pangs of death. It was held in the case of Nazrul Islam (Md) vs State reported in [66 DLR (AD) 199] that, "Lastly' with regard to the period of time spent by the accused in the condemned cell, there are numerous decisions of this Division which shed light on this aspect. In general terms, it may be stated that the length of period spent by a convict in the condemned cell is not necessarily a ground for commutation of the sentence of death. However, where the period spent in the condemned cell is not due to any fault of the convict and where the period spent there is inordinately long, it may be considered as an extenuating ground sufficient for commutation of sentence of death." In view of the decision cited above as well as the circumstances of this case, we are of the view that justice would be sufficiently met if the sentence of death of the appellants Sentu, Mamun and Azanur be commuted to one of imprisonment for life.

80. Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal No.127 of 2014 is dismissed. The sentence of death of the appellant in respect of condemned-prisoner, namely Md Shukur Ali is maintained.

81. The sentence of death in respect of the appellant condemned-prisoner, namely, Sentu, son of Tijabuddin, Village-Lalnagor, Police Station-Daulatpur, District-Kushtia is commuted to imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Taka 50,000(fifty thousand), in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 02(two) years more. He will get the benefit of section 35A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 in calculation of his sentence: The concerned Jail Authority is directed to shift the appellant to the normal jail from the condemned cell forthwith.

82. Jail Appeal No.26 of 2014 is dismissed with modification of sentence.

83. The sentence of death of appellant condemned-prisoner, namely, Mamun, son of Sirajul Pramanik of Village-Lalnagor, Police Station-Daulatpur, District-Kushtia is commuted to imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Taka 50,000(fifty thousand), in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 02(two) years more. However, he will get the benefit of section 35A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 in calculation of his sentence. The concerned jail authority is directed to shift the appellant to the normal jail from the condemned cell forthwith.

84. Jail Appeal No.29 of 2014 is dismissed with modification of sentence.

85. The sentence of death of appellant condemned-prisoner, namely, Azanur Rahman, son of Talemuddin Mondal, Village-Lalnagor, Police Station-Daulatpur, District-Kushtia is commuted to imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Taka 50,000 (fifty thousand), in default, to suffer imprisonment for 02(two) years more. He will get the benefit of section 35A of the Code of Criminal Procedure in calculation of his sentence. The concerned jail authority is directed to shift the appellant to the normal from the condemned cell forthwith.

Jail Appeal No.29 of 2014 in respect of the appellant Sentu, is redundant in the light of the judgment in Criminal appeal No.127 of 2014.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===


===9 CLR (AD) 71=== ===19 ADC (AD) 157=== ===29 BLT (AD) 298=== 26 ALR (AD) 72=== ===74 DLR (AD) 25===
Appellate Division 
(Criminal)

Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman
Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan

Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1088 of 2019.

(From the order dated the 18th of June, 2019 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019).

State
... Petitioner
VS
Aslam Shikder
... Respondent

Judgement Date : November 22, 2021

Counsels:
AM Amin Uddin Attorney-General, with Biswajit Deb Nath Deputy Attorney-General, instructed by Sufia Khatun Advocate-on-Record
-- For the Petitioner.

Md Bodrul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent.

Judgment
Md Imman Ali, J: This criminal petition for leave to appeal was filed by the State against the order dated 18-6-2019 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 granting ad interim bail for a period of one year to Aslam Shikder who was accused in Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019 pending in the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.7, Dhaka.

2. The accused, Aslam Shikder was charged with an offence under section 9(1) of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000. During the course of trial, the accused filed a number of applications for bail, lastly on 16-5-2018, which was rejected by the trial Court. The accused then filed Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 before the High Court Division which culminated in the impugned order- granting ad interim bail. The State filed Criminal Miscellaneous Petition for Leave to Appeal No.694 of 2019 before this Division with a prayer for staying operation of the Order dated 18-6-2019 passed by the High Court Division. The State obtained an order of stay of the said order of ad interim bail, from the learned Judge-in-Chamber on 25-6-2019 for a period, of four weeks which was extended by, application for extension dated 14-7-2019.

3. When the criminal petition for leave to appeal was taken up for hearing on 12-3-2020, this Court was informed that the appellant had already been released on bail granted by the trial Court. In view of such revelation, this Court passed the following order on 12-3-2020.

“Having gone through the orders sheet in particular order No.44 dated 2-3-2020 of Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.7 in Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019, we are inclined to call Ms. Musammat Qumrun-nahar, Judge, Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka to appear in person on 2-4-2020 at 9-00 am before this Court to explain how she could grant ad interim bail to the accused respondent Aslam Shikder, notwithstanding the fact that the order of bail granted by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 was stayed by the learned Judge-in-Chamber on 25-6-2019. The order of stay was duly communicated to the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka as is evident by order No.32 dated 26- 9-2019.

For compliance of the order of stay dated 25-6-2019 passed by the learned judge-in-Chamber; the respondent Aslam Shikder is directed to surrender before the learned Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka within 02 (two) weeks from date.

Let this order be communicated by a special messenger of this Court. The office is directed to return the LC records of Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019 of the Judge, Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka at once.

Accordingly, the petition is adjourned to 2-4-2020 for further order."
4. Due to COVID-19 pandemic, this Court could not sit on 2-4-2020. Thereafter, the matter was again posted in the daily cause list on 15-11-2021 and an order was passed directing Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar to appear in person before this Court on 22-11-2021 at 9-30 am.

5. Today (22-11-2021) Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar, the learned Judge of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Dainan Tribunal-7 physically appeared in Court No.1 and was heard in camera by virtual means. All members of the public, learned Advocates, court staff and officers, apart from the Special Officer of the Supreme Court; were excluded from the hearing.

6. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar was heard at length by the Full Bench of this Court. She was asked to explain how she could pass the order of ad interim bail to accused Aslam Shikder on 2-3-2020 when there was in existence an order of this Court dated 25-6-2019 staying the order of bail granted in his favour by the High Court Division. She replied that she was not aware of the order of stay passed by this Court. It was then pointed out to her that the records of the concerned case kept in her Court, particularly Order No.32 dated 26-9-2019 shows that the order of stay passed by this Court had been communicated to her Court. In reply she stated that she did not go through the record of the case and was not aware of the order of this Division which stayed the order of bail granted by the High Court Division. She repeatedly apologized for not having gone through the records of the case before passing the order granting bail to the accused.

7. The learned members of the Bench pointed out to Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar that her orders dated 30-1-2020 and 2-3-2020 indicate that she had in fact gone through the records. We find that her order dated 2-3-2020 refers to an earlier order of the Tribunal dated. 11-3-2019 by which an application for bail filed by the accused had been rejected and the subsequent Criminal Appeal No.3526 of 2019 had been disposed of by the High Court Division on 16-4-2019. That order of the High Court Division is mentioned in the Tribunal's order No. 13 dated 16-6-2019 and order No.15 dated 25-6-2019. If she had diligently performed her judicial function and looked a little further, then she would have found that her predecessor had granted bail to the accused on 25-6-2019 pursuant to the order of bail granted by the High Court Division on 18-6-2019 which was communicated under a memo of the High Court Division dated 24-6- 2019. She would have also found that by order No.16 dated 27-6-2019 her predecessor had cancelled the bail of the accused in view of the order of stay passed by this Division on 25-6-2019, and on the next date (1-7- 2019) the accused was produced from jail custody.

8. We find from the records of the Tribunal that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar's predecessor refused the bail applications of the accused on five occasions. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar's intentional oversight to see the entire records of the case indicates bad intention.

9. It is true that the matter of granting bail to any accused is within the discretion of the learned Judge considering the bail application, but bail cannot be granted to an accused whose bail order has been stayed by the apex court. Moreover, discretion must be exercised judiciously, and any such application must be scrutinised in the light of all the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence and materials on record. In the instant case, the prosecution case had been closed and arguments placed by the learned Advocates. It is highly improper to grant an accused bail when the case is ready for pronouncement of judgment, especially when the allegation is of an offence so Serious as rape and when bail has been consistently refused by all the Courts.

10. Moreover, it is evident that the order of bail granted by Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar to accused Aslam Shikder is in violation of the order passed by this Court; which she evidently ignored. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar has palpably acted in defiance of the order of this Court ignoring the fact that her predecessor had canceled the bail of the accused in view of the selfsame order of this Court and the existence of that order is apparent on the face of the record. Thereafter, within seven days of granting bail to the accused, on 10-3-2020 Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar expressed her embarrassment and recused herself from further dealings with the trial. This was done on a date when the case was not fixed for trial and there was no apparent reason for her to feel embarrassed after giving uncalled for relief to the accused by granting him bail in utter violation of the order of this Court.

11. In the light of the discussion above, we are of the view that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar in granting bail to accused Aslam Shikder has acted in patent violation of the order of this Court. We hold that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar is not fit to preside over any criminal matters. Hence, in exercise of our power Under Article 104 of the Constitution, the Sessions power of Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar is hereby seized. Henceforth Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar will not preside over any criminal matters in any Court of law in Bangladesh.

12. We note that by a subsequent order the judgment in the case was pronounced on 14-10-2020 acquitting the accused, and the said acquittal is under appeal in Criminal Appeal No.05 of 2020.

13. Accordingly, with the above observations and direction the criminal petition for leave to appeal is disposed of.

14. Let a copy of this order be communicated to Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar and the Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs.

15. Let a copy of this order be placed on the Annual Confidential Record (ACR) of Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===9 CLR (AD) 71=== ===19 ADC (AD) 157=== ===29 BLT (AD) 298=== ===26 ALR (AD) 72=== ===74 DLR (AD) 25===
Appellate Division 
(Criminal)

Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman
Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan

Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.1088 of 2019.

(From the order dated the 18th of June, 2019 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019).

State
... Petitioner
VS
Aslam Shikder
... Respondent

Judgement Date : November 22, 2021

Counsels:
AM Amin Uddin Attorney-General, with Biswajit Deb Nath Deputy Attorney-General, instructed by Sufia Khatun Advocate-on-Record
-- For the Petitioner.

Md Bodrul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent.

Judgment
Md Imman Ali, J: This criminal petition for leave to appeal was filed by the State against the order dated 18-6-2019 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 granting ad interim bail for a period of one year to Aslam Shikder who was accused in Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019 pending in the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.7, Dhaka.

2. The accused, Aslam Shikder was charged with an offence under section 9(1) of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000. During the course of trial, the accused filed a number of applications for bail, lastly on 16-5-2018, which was rejected by the trial Court. The accused then filed Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 before the High Court Division which culminated in the impugned order- granting ad interim bail. The State filed Criminal Miscellaneous Petition for Leave to Appeal No.694 of 2019 before this Division with a prayer for staying operation of the Order dated 18-6-2019 passed by the High Court Division. The State obtained an order of stay of the said order of ad interim bail, from the learned Judge-in-Chamber on 25-6-2019 for a period, of four weeks which was extended by, application for extension dated 14-7-2019.

3. When the criminal petition for leave to appeal was taken up for hearing on 12-3-2020, this Court was informed that the appellant had already been released on bail granted by the trial Court. In view of such revelation, this Court passed the following order on 12-3-2020.

“Having gone through the orders sheet in particular order No.44 dated 2-3-2020 of Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.7 in Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019, we are inclined to call Ms. Musammat Qumrun-nahar, Judge, Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka to appear in person on 2-4-2020 at 9-00 am before this Court to explain how she could grant ad interim bail to the accused respondent Aslam Shikder, notwithstanding the fact that the order of bail granted by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.5923 of 2019 was stayed by the learned Judge-in-Chamber on 25-6-2019. The order of stay was duly communicated to the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka as is evident by order No.32 dated 26- 9-2019.

For compliance of the order of stay dated 25-6-2019 passed by the learned judge-in-Chamber; the respondent Aslam Shikder is directed to surrender before the learned Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka within 02 (two) weeks from date.

Let this order be communicated by a special messenger of this Court. The office is directed to return the LC records of Nari-o-Shishu Case No.15 of 2019 of the Judge, Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal-7, Dhaka at once.

Accordingly, the petition is adjourned to 2-4-2020 for further order."
4. Due to COVID-19 pandemic, this Court could not sit on 2-4-2020. Thereafter, the matter was again posted in the daily cause list on 15-11-2021 and an order was passed directing Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar to appear in person before this Court on 22-11-2021 at 9-30 am.

5. Today (22-11-2021) Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar, the learned Judge of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Dainan Tribunal-7 physically appeared in Court No.1 and was heard in camera by virtual means. All members of the public, learned Advocates, court staff and officers, apart from the Special Officer of the Supreme Court; were excluded from the hearing.

6. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar was heard at length by the Full Bench of this Court. She was asked to explain how she could pass the order of ad interim bail to accused Aslam Shikder on 2-3-2020 when there was in existence an order of this Court dated 25-6-2019 staying the order of bail granted in his favour by the High Court Division. She replied that she was not aware of the order of stay passed by this Court. It was then pointed out to her that the records of the concerned case kept in her Court, particularly Order No.32 dated 26-9-2019 shows that the order of stay passed by this Court had been communicated to her Court. In reply she stated that she did not go through the record of the case and was not aware of the order of this Division which stayed the order of bail granted by the High Court Division. She repeatedly apologized for not having gone through the records of the case before passing the order granting bail to the accused.

7. The learned members of the Bench pointed out to Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar that her orders dated 30-1-2020 and 2-3-2020 indicate that she had in fact gone through the records. We find that her order dated 2-3-2020 refers to an earlier order of the Tribunal dated. 11-3-2019 by which an application for bail filed by the accused had been rejected and the subsequent Criminal Appeal No.3526 of 2019 had been disposed of by the High Court Division on 16-4-2019. That order of the High Court Division is mentioned in the Tribunal's order No. 13 dated 16-6-2019 and order No.15 dated 25-6-2019. If she had diligently performed her judicial function and looked a little further, then she would have found that her predecessor had granted bail to the accused on 25-6-2019 pursuant to the order of bail granted by the High Court Division on 18-6-2019 which was communicated under a memo of the High Court Division dated 24-6- 2019. She would have also found that by order No.16 dated 27-6-2019 her predecessor had cancelled the bail of the accused in view of the order of stay passed by this Division on 25-6-2019, and on the next date (1-7- 2019) the accused was produced from jail custody.

8. We find from the records of the Tribunal that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar's predecessor refused the bail applications of the accused on five occasions. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar's intentional oversight to see the entire records of the case indicates bad intention.

9. It is true that the matter of granting bail to any accused is within the discretion of the learned Judge considering the bail application, but bail cannot be granted to an accused whose bail order has been stayed by the apex court. Moreover, discretion must be exercised judiciously, and any such application must be scrutinised in the light of all the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence and materials on record. In the instant case, the prosecution case had been closed and arguments placed by the learned Advocates. It is highly improper to grant an accused bail when the case is ready for pronouncement of judgment, especially when the allegation is of an offence so Serious as rape and when bail has been consistently refused by all the Courts.

10. Moreover, it is evident that the order of bail granted by Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar to accused Aslam Shikder is in violation of the order passed by this Court; which she evidently ignored. Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar has palpably acted in defiance of the order of this Court ignoring the fact that her predecessor had canceled the bail of the accused in view of the selfsame order of this Court and the existence of that order is apparent on the face of the record. Thereafter, within seven days of granting bail to the accused, on 10-3-2020 Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar expressed her embarrassment and recused herself from further dealings with the trial. This was done on a date when the case was not fixed for trial and there was no apparent reason for her to feel embarrassed after giving uncalled for relief to the accused by granting him bail in utter violation of the order of this Court.

11. In the light of the discussion above, we are of the view that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar in granting bail to accused Aslam Shikder has acted in patent violation of the order of this Court. We hold that Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar is not fit to preside over any criminal matters. Hence, in exercise of our power Under Article 104 of the Constitution, the Sessions power of Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar is hereby seized. Henceforth Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar will not preside over any criminal matters in any Court of law in Bangladesh.

12. We note that by a subsequent order the judgment in the case was pronounced on 14-10-2020 acquitting the accused, and the said acquittal is under appeal in Criminal Appeal No.05 of 2020.

13. Accordingly, with the above observations and direction the criminal petition for leave to appeal is disposed of.

14. Let a copy of this order be communicated to Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar and the Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs.

15. Let a copy of this order be placed on the Annual Confidential Record (ACR) of Ms. Musammat Qumrunnahar.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===74 DLR (AD) 28=== ===6 ALR (AD) 205=== ===67 DLR (AD) 218=== ===12 ADC (AD) 369=== ===1 SCOB (AD) 28===

Appellate Division (Criminal)
Present:
Mr. Justice Nazmun Ara Sultana
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Anwarul Haque
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique

Criminal Appeal No.7 of 2004

(From the judgement and order dated 31st July, 2000 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 1349 of 1996.

State
------ Appellant
VS
Mostafizur Rahman and others
------ Respondent

Judgement Date : September 18, 2013

Counsels:
Momtazuddin Fakir, Additional Attorney General, instructed by B. Hossain, Advocate-on Record
----- For the Appellant

None Represented
----- For Respondents.

Judgment
Madam Justice Nazmun Ara Sultana, J:

1. I have gone through the judgments proposed to be delivered by my brothers, Muhammad Imman Ali, J. and Mohammad Anwarul Haque,J. I agree with the reasoning and findings given by Mohammad Anwarul Haque,J.

MUHAMMAD IMMAN ALI, J:-

2. This criminal appeal, by leave, is directed against the judgement and order dated 31.07.2000 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 1349 of 1996 allowing the appeal.

3. After conclusion of the appeal hearing the view of the majority members of this Division was to dismiss the appeal.

4. I have had the privilege of going through the draft judgement of my learned brother Mr. Justice Mohammad Anwarul Haque. Since I could not agree with the reasoning and findings as disclosed in the majority judgement, I propose to express my own views.

5. The facts of the case have been narrated in the judgement of my learned brother Mr. Mohammad Anwarul Haque, J. and I do not propose to repeat those. However, I shall reproduce facts of the case relevant for the purpose of my opinion.

6. Accused Mostafizur Rahman and Aleya Begum were charged and tried by the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Bishesh Adalat, Rajbari in Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Case No. 13 of 1996 for offences under sections 6 (1)/14 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman (Bishesh Bidhan)Ain, 1995. Upon finding the two accused persons guilty as charged, the learned judge of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Bishesh Adalat sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Taka 5000/- each, in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 1 (one) year more.

7. The victim Shefali Khatun was 10 or 11 years old when her mother, step father and half sister Aleya (accused in the case) sent her to work as a house maid. The evidence and records disclose that at various times she worked as maid servant in the house of Proshanto, Chand Ali, Montu and lastly accused Mostafizur Rahman. At that time she was aged about 13 years. The prosecution case is that she worked in the house of accused Mostafizur Rahman for about 3 months and at that time she was kept in confinement under lock and key and was raped by accused Mostafiz on numerous occasions. She was unable to escape until 31.08.1995. On the day of her escape she met one Ruhul Parvez (P.W.5) on the way, who took her to the house of Komruddin Biswas @ Chand Ali (P.W.3). She narrated her story to P.W. 5, P.W. 3 and Maksuda Begum P.W.4, the wife of Chand Ali. The matter was disclosed to Abu Reza Ashraful Masud (Babu Mollik), the Publisher and Editor of a local Newspaper, namely Dainik Sahaj Katha. The report of the victim’s torture was published in that newspaper on 07.09.1995. After seeing the newspaper report the informant Shamsunnahar Chowdhury (P.W.1), who is the Convener of the Mohila Parishad, Rajbari discussed the matter in their regular meeting on 30.09.1995 and according to the decision of the meeting the informant went to meet the victim on 08.10.1995 at the house of Chand Ali. After that the Mohila Parishad took out a procession on 11.10.1995 and, thereafter, went to the Police Station but the Officer of the Police Station declined to record the First Information Report (F.I.R.). A memorandum was handed over to the Deputy Commissioner and the Superintendent of Police. Ultimately on 24.10.1995 the police accepted the F.I.R. After investigation the police report was submitted on 17.02.1996 stating that the case against the accused persons was not proved, and recommending their discharge. However, the learned Judge took cognizance and after framing charge against accused Mostafizur Rahman under Section 6 (1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman (Bishash Bidhan) Ain, 1995 and against accused Aleya Begum under Section 6 (1)/14 of the said Ain, read the same over to the accused, who pleaded not guilty and sought trial.

8. The prosecution produced 12 witnesses of whom 3 were tendered. The two accused persons were examined under Section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure when they again pleaded their innocence. After hearing argument on behalf the defence and the prosecution and upon consideration of the evidence and materials of record the learned trial Judge convicted the accused persons and sentenced them as stated above.

9. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgement and order of conviction and sentence the accused preferred Criminal Appeal No. 1349 of 1996 before the High Court Division, which was successful and the appellants were acquitted. Hence, the State as petitioner filed the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 37 of 2001. Upon hearing the parties this Division granted leave to consider whether the High Court Division ought to have considered the fact that in the facts and circumstances of the case no eye witness is supposed to remain present at the time of commission of rape and the sole evidence of the victim and circumstantial evidence ought to have been considered, and also to consider whether the High Court Division illegally acquitted the accused without reversing the finding of the trial Court that all the prosecution witnesses supported the F.I.R. case and the evidence of the prosecution witnesses were believed and accepted upon giving cogent reasons.

10. The submissions of learned Additional Attorney General on behalf of the appellant have been reproduced in the majority judgement and I need not repeat them.

11. The High Court Division allowed the appeal on the grounds, firstly, that there was no corroborative evidence regarding rape committed by the accused Mostafizur Rahman. The learned Judges observed that expert examination of the person of the prosecutrix and garments she had worn at the time and place where the rape took place is sine qua non. Since the wearing apparels were neither produced to nor seized by the Investigating Officer they have not been brought on record as material exhibits and “in such circumstances coupled with the evidence of P.W. 12 the Doctor who examined the victim led us to believe that the story of rape as alleged by the prosecution is not true inasmuch as the same is false.” The learned Judges of the High Court Division disbelieved the evidence of the victim since she did not disclose her story to neighbours who sometimes visited the house where she was staying.

12. Secondly, the High Court Division disbelieved the story of the victim because her parents did not lodge the F.I.R. nor came to depose in court, and they asked the victim to stay in the house of the accused, who allegedly raped their daughter which is against human conduct.

13. Thirdly, the High Court Division observed that there was no reasonable explanation as to why the F.I.R. was lodged after inordinate delay “which makes a reasonable man suspicious about genuineness of the prosecution case.”

14. The trial Court, on the other hand, had the benefit of observing all the witnesses who deposed in court and gave an elaborate judgement convicting the accused persons upon finding that the prosecution case was fully corroborated. The learned Tribunal Judge observed that the victim was taken back from her previous employer in Mirpur under false pretext and sent to the house of accused Mostafizur Rahman as a maid servant which was a preconceived plan of the victim’s half sister, Aleya. He pointed out that the fact of death of her maternal grandmother was proved to be false. So she was taken from her place of work at Mirpur on false pretences so that she could work in the house of accused Mostifiz. He found P. Ws. 3-5 to be independent and disinterested witnesses and their evidence was corroborative. He also found that P.W. 1, the informant was neither related to the victim nor had any reason to bring a false case against accused Mostafizur Rahman and Aleya. He observed that the witnesses had no enmity with the accused.

15. In a case of this nature it is imperative to keep in mind certain social and moral aspects as well as the background of the victim for proper adjudication. Shefali was an illiterate village girl who at the time of occurrence was below the age of 13 years. She came from a poor family, who forced her to work as a maid servant from the age of about 10/11 according to the evidence of P.Ws. 4 and 5. In all, she worked in 4 households including that of accused Mostafizur Rahman, where she remained confined for about 3 months. Previously she had worked for about 18/20 months in the house of one Montu, at Mirpur. She also worked for Proshanto and Chand Ali. It is also noted that her mother had re-married and co-accused Aleya was her halfsister and that either the victim’s father was dead or was not living with her. It was the half-sister Aleya and her step father and mother, who insisted that she came back from Mirpur where she had been working happily for a long period of time so that she could work for accused Mostafiz. The finding of the trial Court is that this was preplanned and that Shefali had been brought away from Mirpur under a false pretext. The evidence of the victim suggests that it was the family’s plan that Shefali should marry Mostafiz and that in spite of the fact that Mostafiz raped her, the family forced her to stay with him as he paid them money. She stated in her evidence that because she refused to marry Mustafiz, he and Aleya used to beat her. Hence, one should not lose sight of the fact that Shefali was in a most vulnerable condition.

16. The High Court Division did not believe the story of rape by the accused as, according to their Lordships, there was no corroborative evidence. Clearly the learned Judges were in patent error since the facts of the instant case would show that it is a case of “statutory rape”. Section 375 of the Penal Code provides as follows:

“A man is said to commit “rape” who except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the five following description.-
First.-Against her will.
Secondly.- Without her consent.
Thirdly.- With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her in fear of death, or of hurt.
Fourthly.- With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband, and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.- With or without her consent, when she is under fourteen years of age.
Explanation.- Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual intercourse necessary to the offence of rape.
Explanation.- Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under thirteen years of age, is not rape.
17. Description “Fifthly” under section 375 clearly indicates that sexual intercourse with a child below the age of 14 is rape whether it is with consent or without consent. The medical report clearly shows that the victim was habituated to sexual intercourse and, therefore, whoever had sexual intercourse with the victim would be guilty of rape, even if sexual intercourse took place with her consent.

18. The learned Judges of the High Court Division were clearly of the view that any allegation of rape by the prosecutrix has to be corroborated. They went so far as to say “the evidence of a prosecution (sic. prosecutrix)” in a rape case is customarily received by the court with some suspicion. This is clearly perverse since the victim of rape should be dealt with and considered in the same way as a witness who was injured in the course of the occurrence. Referring to Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence, the learned Judges implicitly required evidence of marks of violence on the body of the victim, which having been absent, they found the allegation of rape to be not substantiated. Again I must say that the existence of marks of violence is not a sine qua non of rape. The learned Judges further observed as follows:

“Expert’s examination of the person of the prosecution (sic. prosecutrix) and garments she had weared (sic.) at the time and the place where the rape took place is sine qua non in such case.”
19. This statement/requirement as pronounced by the learned Judges of the High Court Division is absolutely misconceived. It can never be said that a case of rape is not proved simply because the wearing apparel of the raped victim was not produced to the investigating officer and no expert examination took place. Clearly the views of the learned Judges are misconceived and perverse. Sexual intercourse with a girl below the age of 14 years is ipso facto rape.

20. The learned Judges of the High Court Division disbelieved the victim because she had not reported the occurrence of rape upon her to the people who were either living in the vicinity or visited the house where she was confined. From the evidence on record it appears that the learned Judges overlooked many important factors narrated by the victim in her deposition before the court, including the fact that she was kept under lock and key everyday; that the children of Joinal, a neighbour used to visit when Mostafiz was at home; that the children used to eat guava from Mostafiz’s tree when he was at home; that the neighbours used to take water from Mostafiz’s house when he was at home; that when Hashem was at home the victim was locked up; she used to play with children when Mostafiz was present. Mostafiz always kept the key with him and finally she stated also that she could not tell anyone through fear as Mostafiz had threatened her. Overlooking such important factors the Hon’ble Judges of the High Court Division disbelieved the testimony of the victim because she did not tell anyone about her plight, ignoring the social context and practical impediments in the way of a vulnerable child.

21. The learned Judges of the High Court Division disbelieved the story of the victim because her parents allowed her to continue to live in the house of Mostafiz in spite of the fact that he raped her, which, according to them, is against human conduct. However, they have overlooked the fact that the victim was not the real child of the father and not a full-sister of accused Aleya and that it was pre-planned that the victim should stay in the house of accused Mostafiz so that he would marry her. The victim also stated in her statement before the Magistrate that her parents received money from Mostafiz and that Aleya would also beat her if she did not stay in the house of Mostafiz.

22. Clearly, the whole of that family was scheming against the victim, ensuring that she continues to live in the house of accused Mostafiz. It is, therefore, neither unusual nor surprising that any member of the victim’s family did not come forward to lodge the F.I.R. or to depose in court.

23. With regard to the delay in lodging the F.I.R., the learned Judges of the High Court Division appear to have ignored the fact that the victim did not have the support of her family nor anyone else to whom she could turn for assistance. The informant runs an organization which admittedly assists victims such as Shefali, but at the same time was constrained by factors relating to the organization’s business procedure. It is not unnatural that the organization would be required to go through certain formalities before lodging any F.I.R. and those formalities require meeting of the other members which in turn requires fixing of dates for those meetings. In such circumstances delay in commencing the procedural process is inevitable. Moreover, it appears that the police were initially reluctant to accept any information and did so later upon intervention by higher authority. Hence, it cannot be said that the delay in lodging the F.I.R. is unexplained. Furthermore, one should not lose sight of the fact that in a case of this nature where the chastity of a maiden young girl is in question publicity and legal process is purposely avoided keeping in mind her future. There is no gainsaying that once it becomes known that a girl had been raped, she effectively becomes an outcast having no prospect of marriage. It takes a lot of bravery to publicise the fact of rape of an unmarried girl in a conservative society such as ours. This factor alone speaks of truthfulness of the victim.

24. With regard to the evidence of the witnesses, we note that the informant has deposed as P.W.1 in an official capacity as the Convener of the Rajbari Mohila Parishad, stating facts as they were reported to her. There is no question of any motive being present for her to file any false case against the accused. Moreover, it is noted that no question was put to her with regard to the delay in lodging the F.I.R. The evidence of P.W. 2, the victim gives a vivid description of her vulnerable condition and the tragic and horrendous events which she had to suffer. It is noted that there was no suggestion that she had had any sexual intercourse with anyone other than the accused Mostafiz. Her evidence shows that she was very happy in the house of Montu at Mirpur. There was no suggestion that she had had any sexual relationship with anyone in that household. P.Ws 3, 4 and 5 are independent witnesses who narrated their knowledge of the story and no suggestion was made as to any existence of enmity between the witnesses and the accused. I note from the evidence of P.W. 5 Ruhul Parvez that when he met her at 5:30 in the morning she was in fear and was crying. This appears to be quite natural in the attendant situation as described.

25. In the facts and circumstances discussed above, I am of the view that the discussion of the evidence and materials by the High Court Division indicates perversity, misconception and lack of appreciation of the surrounding circumstances leading to the occurrence. I may profitably refer to the decision of the Indian Supreme Court in the case of Md. Iqbal and anr. Vs. State of Jharkhand reported in AIR 2013 SC 3077. In that case the father of the prosecutrix as well as other witnesses, who had been examined as prosecution witnesses were declared hostile and did not support the case of the prosecution. No spermatozoa were found in the vaginal swab examination and there was no injury in the private parts. Their lordships held that:

“There is no prohibition in law to convict the accused of rape on the basis of sole testimony of the prosecutrix and the law does not require that her statement be corroborated by the statements of other witnesses.”
26. Their lordships went on to observe that no explanation had been furnished by either of the accused as to why the prosecutrix had deposed against them and involved them in such a heinous crime. It was further held that:

“Rape cannot be treated only as a sexual crime but it should be viewed as a crime involving aggression which leads to the domination of the prosecutrix.”
27. It was further held that:

“In case of rape besides the psychological trauma, there is also social stigma to the victim…………….Social stigma has a devastating effect on rape victim. It is violation of her right of privacy. Such victims need physical, mental, psychological and social rehabilitation…………… Rape is blatant violation of women’s bodily integrity.”
28. In the facts of the instant case, a 13 year old house maid has undoubtedly been raped and there is no reason why the victim, who suffered the trauma and the stigma that goes with it, should not be believed. She has put herself in an invidious situation where she will be shunned and marginalised for the rest of her life and yet she has been disbelieved. This is clearly a travesty of justice.

29. In view of the above discussion it is my opinion that the appeal should be allowed.

30. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The judgement and order of the High Court Division is set aside and the judgement and order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial court is affirmed.

Mohammad Anwarul Haque, J:

31. This criminal appeal is directed against the judgment and order of acquittal passed on 31.07.2000 by Division Bench of the High Court Division, in Criminal Appeal No. 1349 of 1996 arising out of Nari-O Shishu Nirjaton Daman Case No. 13 of 1996, Rajbari, acquitting the accused–appellant of the charge punishable under section 6(1)/14 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan (Bishes Bidhan) Ain, 1995 on setting aside the order of conviction and sentence of life imprisonment with fine of Tk.5000/-in default to pay to suffer one year imprisonment more passed by the judge of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman, Bishes Adalot.

32. In short, the case of the prosecution for the purpose of disposal of the appeal is as follows:

33. Victim Shefali was appointed as domestic worker in a house, situated at Mirpur, Dhaka. While she was rendering her service there; her step sister accused Aleya, serving at Rajbari as maid servant in the house of accused Mostafizur Rahman, called her back from Dhaka to Rajbari but she did not respond but ultimately accused Aleya, step sister of victim P.W.2, brought her in the Rajbari on false plea of her maternal grand mother’s death and engaged her as maid servant in the house of accused Mostafizur Rahman on 01.06.1996 where she was also there.

34. Taking such opportunity the accused Mostafizur Rahman began to ill-treat her and frequently committed rape on her who was at that time a minor girl of 13 years only.

35. To release herself from such an atmosphere P.W.2, victim Shefali, fled away from the house of the accused Mostafizur Rahman on 31.08.1995 and took shelter in the house of local businessman P.W.3, Chand Ali, where she previously worked as domestic-worker with the help of P.W.6 & 7 and others. Then victim disclosed the entire story of rape and related physical torture committed by accused Mostafizur Rahman which was published in the daily news paper “Soja Katha”. Then local “Mohila Parishad” took up the matter and lodged the FIR on 24.10.1995 with the help of local administration, Rajbari showing the date of occurrence from 1.6.1995 to 31.8.1995.

36. During the course of investigation victim was produced before learned Magistrate who recorded the statement of the victim under section 164 of the Code of Criminal procedure and she was sent to doctor for physical examination.

37. However, on the conclusion of investigation a final report was submitted which was not accepted by the learned Judge of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman Bishesh Adalat rather took cognizance of the offence punishable under section 6(1)/14 of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan (Bishesh Bidhan) Ain, 1995 and issued process to secure the presence of the accused to face trial.

38. On conclusion of the trial the learned Judge of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Bishesh Adalat ensured the conviction of the accused– appellant–respondent for commission of the offence referred to above. Subsequently convicted accused preferred a criminal appeal to the High Court Division which was heard and allowed acquitting the convicted appellant of the charge punishable under section 6(1)/14 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman (Bishesh Bidhan) Ain, 1995.

39. Mr. Momtaz Uddin Fakir the learned Additional Attorney General submits that the High Court Division erred substantially in upsetting the sentence of imprisonment for life awarded under section 6(1)/14 of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjaton Daman (Bishesh Bidhan) Ain, 1995 since it is based on sound and sturdy reasons. Mr. Fakir further submits that the High Court Division has chosen to advance on fragile reason to upset a well resound conclusion of the trial court based on the evidence of the prosecutrix which is relevant one. Moreover, the High Court Division has given to much importance on the inordinate delay in lodging the FIR without considering the prevailing circumstances which was absolutely beyond the control of a minor victim. As such impugned Judgment of the High Court Division acquitting the accused cannot be sustained. In fact, the behavior of the victim of rape would depend upon the circumstances where she is placed. In the instant case since victim was kept confined she had no occasions to lodge the FIR with help of any one at an earliest opportunity. So the impugned judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court Division is to be set aside and the very judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court is to be maintained.

40. On the other hand, none is found on behalf of the accused–appellant who has been acquitted by the High Court Division.

41. We have gone through the FIR meticulously which has been lodged by P.W.1 Mrs. Shamsunahar Choudhury who has not given any plausible explanation about the inordinate delay in lodging such FIR.

42. It is evident that there is no eye witness of the occurrence. Even the victim, getting sufficient opportunity to disclose this type of alleged physical torture did not project it to any other requesting to release her from the hand of the accused persons.

43. It is equally interesting to note that in spite of getting this type of information from the victim her parent did not take any step rather asked her to remain in the job in the house of the accused persons. In this connection we are to quote an observation made in case of state of Panjab Vs Jagir Sing; reported in SCC(1974) PP 285-286:

“A Criminal trial is not like a fairy tale wherein one is free to give flight to one’s imagination and fantasy. It concerns itself with the question as to whether the accused arraigned at the trial is guilty of the crime with which he is changed. Crime is an event in real life and is the product of interplay of different human emotions. In arriving at the conclusion about the guilt of the accused charged with the commission of a crime, the court has to judge the evidence by the yardstick of probabilities, its intrinsic worth and the animus of witnesses. Every case in the final analysis would have to depend upon its own facts. Although the benefit of every reasonable doubt should be given to the accused, the courts should not at the same time reject evidence which is ex facie trustworthy on grounds which are fanciful or in the nature of conjectures”.
44. In fact, materials placed before the court give rise to suspicion against the commission of the offence as narrated by the prosecution. The victim, being a minor, was not handed over to her parents who are her best well-wisher P.W.1 being convener of Mohila Parishad under took the matter for prosecution beyond the knowledge of her parent. As such High Court Division disbelieved the entire story of commission of rape on the person of a minor girl which deserves no interference.

45. In facts, the story of rape itself gives rise to a grave suspicion implicating the accused, respondent; as such it will be fully within the domain of the appellate court to acquit the accused. Moreover, the reason of delay in lodging FIR even after the release of the victim from the clutch of the accused has not been properly described; so it is very difficult to consider the evidence of prosecutrix, P.W.2 as beyond any reasonable doubt which is the fundament requirement of conviction of an accused person.

46. Considering the overall situation including the non-examination of the parent of the victim to whom she previously disclosed the entire alleged occurrence and other evidence, adduced by the prosecution, we find no ring of truth beyond any reasonable doubt in the case as narrated by the prosecution. In fact, we are not ready to accept or believe this infirm evidence of the prosecutrix which has rightly been discarded by the High Court Division. In this connection we may also refer the decision of a case Md. Abdul Hamid Mollah Vs. Ali Mollah and another reported in 13 BLD page 127 where their lordships of the Apex Court have observed that the High Court Division on proper assessment of the evidence both oral and circumstantial has taken a decision for acquittal which Appellate Division should not interfere on reevaluating the same available in the record.

47. As such we are not inclined to interfere with the decision of the High Court Division and considering the majority views as shown in the judgment this appeal is dismissed.

Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique, J:

48. I have gone through the judgments proposed to be delivered by my brothers, Muhammad Imman Ali, J. and Mohammad Anwarul Haque, J. I agree with the reasoning and findings given by Mohammad Anwarul Haque, J.

COURT’S ORDER

49. The appeal is dismissed by majority decisions.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===74 DLR (AD) 36===
Appellate Division 

(Criminal)

Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Muhammad Imman Ali
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique
Mr. Justice Abu Bakar Siddiquee
Mr. Justice Md. Nuruzzaman
Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan

Criminal Appeal No.10 of 2014
With
Jail Petition No.07 of 2014.

(From the judgment and order dated 25-11-2013 passed by the High Court Division in Death Reference No.72 of 2008 with Criminal Appeal No.5027 of 2008 and Jail Appeal No.778 of 2008.)

Mamun @ Mamun Ar Rashid (Md)
-------- Appellant [In both the cases]
VS
State
------- Respondent [In both the cases]

Judgement Date : July 06, 2021

Counsels:
SM Shahjahan, Advocate with Nahid Mahtab, Advocate, instructed by Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Appellant/Petitioner. (In both the cases)

Sk. Md Morshed, Additional Attorney-General, instructed by Hondas Paul, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent. (In both the cases)

Judgment
Syed Mahmud Hossain, CJ: This criminal appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 25-11-2013 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Death Reference No.72 of 2008 heard along with Criminal Appeal No.5027 of 2008 and Jail Appeal No.778 of 2208. The High Court Division accepted the Death Reference and dismissed the appeals and thereby confirmed the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 21-7-2008 passed by the learned Judge, Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.2, Rajshahi in Nari-o-Shishu Case No.79 of 2005 arising out of Charghat Police Station Case No.05 dated 7-12-2004 corresponding to GR Case No.678 of 2004 under section 302 of the Penal Code.

2. The facts, leading to the filing of this criminal appeal, in a nutshell, are:

The prosecution version of the case, in short, is that the deceased Naher Banu, aged about 22 years was given in marriage with the condemned-appellant Md Mamun @ Mamun-or-Rashid 2 years back. She was strangled to death by her husband condemned-appellant Mamun on the night following 7-12-2004, in his house when she was living with him and was in his custody. Immediately after the occurrence, the condemned-appellant and the inmates of the house vanished from the scene. In the above circumstances, the PW 1 Md Idris Ali the elder brother of the deceased, hearing about the incident rushed to the place of occurrence house, saw the dead body, and thereafter lodged an ejahar (Exhibit-1) with Charghat Police Station against the condemned-appellant and others under section 11. (Ka)/30 of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan. Daman Ain-2000 (amended in 2003).

3. Police investigated the case and submitted charge-sheet on 31-1-2005 against 04 accused including the condemned-appellant under section 11(Ka)/30 of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 (amended in 2003).

4. After submission of the charge-sheet, the case was transferred to the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.2, Rajshahi for trial and the same was numbered as Nari-o-Shishu Case No.79 of 2005, and the Tribunal framed charge against the condemned-appellant under section 11(Ka) of the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 while the rest 03 co-accused were charged under section 11(Ka)/30 of the said Ain-2000. The charge was read over and explained to the accused present in the dock, but they pleaded not guilty thereto and claimed to be tried.

5. During trial, the prosecution examined as many as 13 witnesses to prove the case and after completion of the prosecution evidence, the accused were further examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but the accused present in the dock pleaded not guilty and declined to adduce any defence evidence.

6. The defence version of the case, as it appears from the trend of cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses, is that the condemned-appellant is innocent and the deceased wife had committed suicide by hanging.

7. On conclusion of trial, the Nari-o-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No.2, Rajshahi altering the charge by its judgment and order dated 21-7-2008, convicted the condemned appellant under section 302 of the Penal Code and sentenced him thereunder to death with a fine of Taka 25,000 and acquitted the co accused, and made the Reference to the High Court Division for confirmation of the sentence of death.

8. The High Court Division upon hearing both the parties accepted the Death Reference and dismissed the appeals and thereby confirmed the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned Judge of the Tribunal.

9. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the High Court Division the condemned prisoner has preferred the instant appeal and jail petition.

10. Mr SM Shanahan, Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that the prosecution version of the case as made out during trial is different from the story stated in the First Information Report (FIR) and the PWs gave evidence to the effect that the deceased Naher Banu had committed suicide by hanging and, as such, the condemned-appellant should be acquitted of the charge levelled against him. He further submits that the prosecution has failed to prove the motive of the case and the post-mortem report which is secondary evidence has not been corroborated by any other legal evidence, direct or circumstantial and mere absconsion of the condemned-appellant immediately after the occurrence is not conclusive of his guilt. He then submits that there is no eye-witnesses to the occurrence and none of the PWs gave evidence that the condemned-appellant was present at the house where the occurrence took place at the material time, but the Tribunal on an erroneous view substituted moral conviction for legal evidence and illegally found the accused guilty of the offence under section 302 of the Penal Code and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence should be set aside. He continues to submit that this is a case of no evidence and the conviction and sentence is based on secondary evidence, that is, the post mortem report ignoring the substantive evidence of suicide alleged to have been committed by the deceased. He lastly submits that the condemned-appellant has been languishing in condemned cell since 21-7-2008 and, as such, a lenient view should be taken in respect of his sentence by commuting the sentence of death to imprisonment for life.

11. Mr Sheikh Mohammad Morshed, learned Additional Attorney-General, appearing on behalf of the State-respondent, on the other hand, supports the impugned judgment delivered by the High Court Division. He further submits that when wife died within the custody of her husband, the husband was to explain the cause of death and that instead of doing so the condemned-appellant fled away from his house, and after long absconsion he was arrested. He then submits that absconsion is one of the strong circumstances that points at the condemned prisoner's guilt. Considering the evidence in post-mortem report coupled with the absconsion of the appellant, it could be said without any hesitation that it is the condemned-appellant who had murdered his wife by strangulation and, as such, no interference is called for. As regards sentence, he submits that now a days wife-killing by the husbands has increased alarmingly and, as such, no sympathy should be shown to the condemned-appellant and the sentence of death should be maintained.

12. We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocate for condemned-appellant and the learned Additional Attorney-General for the State-respondent, perused the impugned judgment and the evidence on record.

13. Admittedly, there is' no direct evidence to the occurrence. It should not be expected that the witnesses would be present when the husband committed murder of his wife in his dwelling house and, even if, there were witnesses, that is, inmates of the house they would not depose against the husband. Now a days it has become order of the day.

14. PW 1, Idris Ali, the full brother of the deceased even did not support the prosecution case although he lodged an FIR accusing the condemned-appellant, for murdering his sister.

15. PW 2, Md Mozammel Hoque, the father of the ill fated deceased, also deposed that he heard his daughter committed suicide. He did not see any mark of injury in the dead body.

16. PW 3, Md Shafiqul, maternal uncle of the deceased, also deposed in the same tone. The other' local witnesses from PWs 4-11 stated in a chorus that Naher Banu had committed suicide. The only legal evidence before the Court is the post-mortem report of the doctor, who in the post-mortem report stated as under:

"Death in my opinion is due to asphyxia following strangulation by ligature material. Death is homicidal hi nature."
17. PW 13, Dr. Emdadur Rahman, Assistant Professor, Forensic Medicine, Rajshahi Medical College Hospital; who performed the post-mortem on the dead body of the deceased, deposed before the trial Court and supported his opinion in an unequivocal manner. Therefore, there is no gainsaying that Naher Banu did not commit suicide but she was done to death by strangulation.

18. In the case in hand, the defence miserably failed to prove that Nahar Banu committed suicide and rather she was done to death by strangulation. When wife dies within the custody of her husband, the husband is to explain the cause of her death. In the instant case, we find that the deceased was admittedly living with the condemned-appellant at the relevant time and thus the condemned-appellant was obliged to give an explanation as to how his wife had met with her death although normally an accused is under no obligation to account for the death for which he is on trial. The consideration is bound to differ in a case like this.

19. This is the consistent view of the superior Courts of the Subcontinent including this Division.

20. Though FIR is not a substantive evidence, it can be gathered from the statements made therein that the relationship between the husband and the wife was bitter because of demand of dowry by the husband. It is alleged in the FIR that Taka 30,000 was paid to the condemned-appellant at the time of marriage.

21. In the case of Nausher Ali Sarder & others vs The State, 39 DM (AD) 194 it has been held that death sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life because "bitter matrimonial relationship played a part in this nefarious situation and while inflicting sentence such relationships, cannot be overlooked." In the present case, it is evidently clear that the offence followed a tenure of rancorous marriage between the appellant and the deceased.

22. Having taken into consideration all the facts and circumstances of the case, we are inclined to commute the sentence of death to imprisonment for life.

23. Accordingly, this criminal appeal is dismissed. Thee conviction imposed upon the condemned appellant under section 302 of the Penal Code passed by the trial Court and confirmed by the High Court Division is maintained but his sentence of death is commuted to one for imprisonment for life and also to pay a fine of Taka 10,000 (ten thousand), in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 1 (one) month more. He will get the benefit of section 35A of the Code of Criminal Procedure and other remissions as admissible under the Jail Code.

Jail Petition No.07 of 2014 is also disposed of in the light of the judgment delivered in Criminal Appeal No.10 of 2014.

End.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===
