===75 DLR (AD) 171===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Review Petition Nos. 66, 67 and 69 of 2022

Decided On: 02.03.2023

Zahangir Alam (Md.) and Ors. Vs. State

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin, M. Enayetur Rahim, Md. Ashfaqul Islam, Md. Abu Zafor Siddique and Jahangir Hossain, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S.N. Goswami, Senior Advocate and N.K. Saha, Senior Advocate instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: A.M. Aminuddin, Attorney General, Sk. Md. Morshed, Additional Attorney General, Mohammad Saiful Alam, Sayem Mohammad Murad, Tamanna Ferdous, AAGs and Abantee Nurul, AAG instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XLVII Rule 1; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164(3); Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 105; Penal Code, 1860 - Section 201, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 300, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 302, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 34

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.04.2022 passed by this Division in Criminal Appeal No. 90 of 2013 with Criminal Appeal No. 108 of 2013 with Criminal Petition Nos. 257, 260 of 2022 and 322-323 of 2019 and Jail Petition Nos. 27-28 of 2014

Result:
In Favour of State

JUDGMENT
Md. Ashfaqul Islam, J.

1. All the review petitions are directed against a judgment of this court in its appellate forum maintaining the death sentence awarded to the petitioners Md. Zahangir Alam, Dr. Mian Mohammad Mohiuddin and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to Md. Abdus Salam.

2. The prosecution case, in short, was that, Dr. S. Taher Ahmed was the senior most Professor of the Department of Geology and Mining, University of Rajshahi. He was a Member of both the Departmental Planning Committee and the Expert Committee of the University. Pursuant to the pre-concerted plan, Dr. Taher was brutally killed at his Quarters (Pa-23/B) by all the accused in furtherance of their common intention 1-2-2006 after 10-00 pm or thereabout on his arrival thereat from Dhaka. After the killing of Dr. Taher, his dead body was dumped into a manhole behind the place of occurrence house. In the morning of 3-2-2006, his dead body was recovered from the manhole. Thereafter, the son of the victim, namely, Mr. Sanjid Alvi Ahmed alias Himel (PW 1), lodged an ejahar with Motihar Police Station, Rajshahi.

3. The Investigating Officers PW 47 Md. Omar Faruk, PW 48 Md. Golam Mahfiz and PW 49 Achanul Kabir investigated the case. Accused Zahangir Alam, Abdus Salam and Nazmul made confessional statements before PW 46 Magistrate Jobeda Khatun recorded under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Finding prima facie case, the last Investigating Officer submitted a charge-sheet against all the accused including the acquitted accused Md. Azim Uddin Munshi and Md. Mahbub Alam @ Saleheen for committing offence punishable under section 302/201/34 of the Penal Code.

4. The Tribunal charged all the accused except Azim Uddin Munshi under section 302/34 of the Penal Code and the co-accused Azim Uddin Munshi was charged under section 201 of the Penal Code. They pleaded not guilty thereto and claimed to be tried.

5. The defence version of the case, as it appears from the trend of cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses, was that the accused are innocent and have been falsely implicated in the case and the alleged confessional statements of the accused Zahangir, Salam and Nazmul are the products of police torture, oppression and maltreatment and the PW 25 Dr. Md. Sultan-ul-Islam Tipu and PW 29 Golam Sabbir Sattar Tapu are responsible for the death of Dr. Taher.

6. After hearing both the parties and upon perusing the materials on record and having regard to the attending facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the prosecution brought the charge home against the appellants and petitioners, and accordingly, it convicted and sentenced them. The Tribunal also found the co-accused Saleheen and Azim Uddin Munshi not guilty and accordingly acquitted them.

7. Against the said judgment and order of the Tribunal, the convicts preferred criminal appeals and jail appeals. The Tribunal transmitted the record to the High Court Division for confirmation of the sentence of death which was registered as Death Reference No. 57 of 2008. The High Court Division by the impugned judgment and order, dismissed the Criminal Appeal Nos. 3455 and 4058 and Jail Appeal Nos. 631-634 of 2008. However, the High Court Division commuted the sentence of death to imprisonment for life awarded to convict Md. Abdus Salam and Md. Nazmul. It confirmed the sentence of death awarded to the appellant Dr. Mian Md. Mohiuddin and Md. Zahangir Alam. Against which, they preferred criminal appeals, criminal petitions and jail petitions and the state preferred Criminal Petitions. By a judgment and order dated 5-4-2022 this Division dismissed all those cases and affirmed the death sentence awarded to the petitioners Md. Zahangir Alam, Dr. Mian Mohammad Mohiuddin and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to Md. Abdus Salam. Against which the present review petitions have been filed by the convicts.

8. In the judgment the charges and evidence of the witnesses both oral and documentary have been meticulously considered and after evaluation of the same this court affirmed the sentence of death awarded to the two petitioners and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to the another petitioner as mentioned above. In a review matter this court cannot re-assess the evidence afresh and re-hear the case. This court disposes of the points so far as it is relevant for the disposal of the matter. Learned Counsel argued on various points as if he were arguing an appeal and accordingly we refrained from discussing those points on reassessment of the evidence.

9. Mr. SN Goswami, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners in Review petition Nos. 66 and 69 of 2022 has submitted a written argument. His contention is that this court committed error of law in believing the confessional statements made by the accused petitioners without considering the following points:

Confessional statement of accused Jahangir was not voluntary in nature.
Confession recorded by Magistrate in violation of section 164(3), Code of the Criminal Procedure cannot be used to convict the Appellant
Confessional statement of accused Jahangir was not true.
Retracted confession should be corroborated in material particular by other evidence.
10. The points raised by the learned counsel as above have already been answered by this Division in the appeal. This court has thoroughly assessed the evidence of the witnesses both oral and documentary and on a careful evaluation of the confessional statements, found that their statements are consistent with one another and corroborates the version given by each other and opined that confessing accused were speaking the truth. Therefore, those points are beyond the ambit of review and there is no scope for reconsideration of those facts.

11. The learned Senior Advocate further submits that the accused petitioner is in the condemn cell for more than 14 1/2 years suffering the pangs of death and it may be a good ground for commutation of sentence of death.

12. Mr. SM Shahjahan, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner in Review petition No. 67 of 2022 has adopted the same argument advanced by the learned Senior Advocate Mr. SN Goswami.

13. On the other hand Mr. AM Aminuddin, the learned Attorney-General appearing for the State, submits that this Division elaborately discussed the evidence and answered those points raised by the learned Senior Counsel in the judgment sought to be reviewed. Since the points have already been considered by this Division in the judgment and the learned Counsel failed to show any error of law apparent on the face of the record in the conclusion arrived at by this Division, the points raised by the learned Counsel do not call for any interference.

14. Let us first discuss the relevant law, rules and decisions of the apex courts of home and abroad to maintain a petition for review in a criminal proceeding.

15. Provision of Article 105 of the Constitution empowers this Division to review its judgment pronounced or Order made "subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament or of any Rules made by the division". This Division has made Rules for the review of criminal proceeding.

16. Rule 1 of Order XXVI in part IV of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh (Appellate Division) Rules, 1988 provides:-
"Subject to the law and the practice of the Court, the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of a party to a proceeding, review its judgment or order in a Civil proceeding on grounds similar to those mentioned in Order XLVII, rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure and in a Criminal Proceeding on the ground of an error apparent on the face of the record."

17. In the case of Zobaida Naher @ Jharna vs. Khairunnessa being dead her heirs Md. Feroz Alam and others 3 BLC (AD) 170 it has been observed:
"A review cannot be granted to urge fresh grounds when the judgment itself does not reveal an error apparent on the face of the record. To allow such a prayer for review is to allow re-hearing of the appeal on points not urged by a parry".

18. For better understanding let us now discuss what is an error apparent on the face of the record. This has been explained in the case of AHM Mustain Billah vs. Bangladesh 57 DLR (AD) 41. The concept of error apparent on the face of the record has been explained by his lordship Md. Fazlul Karim, J. at paragraphs 27-28:
"Mere error of fact or law is no error on the face of the record. It is such obvious error of law, which has either crept through Court's oversight or Counsel's mistake and failure to explain the legal position by the learned Counsel for the party. The error must be such which at a glance can be detected without advancing elaborate argument.
Though there is no hard and fast rule as to what is an error apparent on the face of the record but the same depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. But there could not be an error apparent on the face of the record merely because two possible views as to the interpretation or application of law vis-a-vis the particular facts of a case, one view accepted by the Court though may be erroneous but could not be the ground of review even if a decision or order is erroneous in law or on merits, the same shall not amount to an error apparent on the face of the record."

19. In the case of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto vs. Suite reported in PLD 1979 SC 741 as to scope of review and what is error apparent it has been observed:
"In Order that an error may be a ground for review, it is necessary that it must be one which is apparent on the face of the record, that is, it must be so manifest, so clear that no Court could permit such an error to remain on the record. It may be an error of fact or of Law, but it must be an error which is self-evident and floating on the surface, and does not require any elaborate discussion or process of ratiocination. The contention mat the exposition of the Law is incorrect or erroneous, or mat the Court has gone wrong in the application of the Law to the facts of the particular case: or that erroneous inferences have been drawn as a result of appraisal or appreciation of evidence, does not constitute a valid ground for review. However, an Order based on an erroneous assumption of material fact, or without adverting to a provision of Law, or a departure from an undisputed construction of the Law and the Constitution may amount to an error apparent on the face of the record. At the same time if the judgment under review or a finding contained therein, although suffering from an erroneous assumption of facts, is sustainable on other grounds available on the record then although the error may be apparent on the face of the record, it would not justify a review of the judgment or the finding in question. In other words, the error must not only be apparent, but must also have a material bearing on the fate of the case. Errors of inconsequential import do not call for review."

20. In a good number of cases of this Division including the case of Mazdar Hossain vs. Ministry of Finance 7 BLC (AD) 92 it has been held:
"A review is no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected. A review lies where an error apparent on the face of the record exists. It is not a rehearing of the main appeal. Review is not intended to empower the Court to correct the mistaken view of law, if any, taken in the main judgment. It is only a clerical mistake or mistake apparent on the face of the record that can be corrected by leave but does not include the correction of any erroneous view of law taken by the Court."

21. In the case of Sow Chandra Kanta and another vs. Sheik Habib reported in MANU/SC/0064/1975 : AIR 1975 SC 1500 where Krishna Iyer, J. observed as follows:
"A review of a judgment is a serious step and reluctant resort to it is proper only where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept in earlier by judicial fallibility. A mere repetition through different counsel of old and overruled arguments, a second trip over ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these footers is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should not be a routine affair or a habitual step."

22. A review cannot be granted to urge fresh grounds when the judgment itself does not reveal an error apparent on the face of the record. To allow such a prayer for review is to allow a rehearing of the appeal on points not urged by a party. We find support for this view from the following observation of Hamoodur Rahman, CJ in Mohd. Hussain vs. Ahmad Khan, 1971 SCMR 296 (297):
"A review cannot be granted on the ground that the Counsel appearing at the original hearing did not argue or press a particular point which was available to him then and could have been found out with a little amount of diligence. This would really amount to granting a re-hearing of a matter merely to make good the failure on the part of Counsel to argue all the points that could have been argued. This cannot furnish an adequate ground for review."

23. The core question for consideration is whether there is error apparent on the face of the record which calls for interference of the impugned judgment. It is an established jurisprudence that a review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected, but lies only against patent error of law. Where without any elaborate argument one could point to the error and say that here is a substantial point of law which stares one in the face, and mere could reasonably be no two opinions to be entertained about it, a clear case of error apparent on the face of the record would be made out. It is only a clerical mistake or mistake apparent on the face of the record that can be corrected but does not include the correction of any erroneous view of law taken by the Court.

24. Further, it has now been settled that an error is necessary to be a ground for review but it must be one which is so obvious that keeping it on the record will be legally wrong. The moot point is, a party to a litigation is not entitled to seek a review of judgment merely for the purpose of rehearing or a fresh decision of the case. The power can be extended in a case where something obvious has been overlooked-some important aspects of the matter has not been considered, the court can reconsider the matter. There are exceptional cases where the court can remedy its judgment. In the alternative, it may be said that the error must also have a material real ground on the face of the case.

25. This Division has repeatedly held that the court should not be oblivious of the theme that when the finality is attached to the judgment delivered by a court, particularly the judgments at the apex level of the judicial hierarchy, upon a full-fledged hearing of the parties, a review petition being neither in the nature of a rehearing of the whole case nor being an appeal against judgment, review is not permissible only to embark upon a reiteration of the same contention which were advanced at the time of hearing of the appeal, but were considered and repelled in the judgment under review. It was also expressed that while dispensing justice, it is the duty of the court to resolve the issue of law properly brought before it and once it is done, the finality is reached and then a review cannot be made on any grounds whatsoever. It is because of the fact that an opinion pronounced by this Division which stands at the apex of the judicial hierarchy should be given finality and any departure from that opinion will be justified only when circumstances of a substantial and compelling character make it necessary to do so.

26. Thus, the powers of review can be exercised sparingly within the limits of the statute. In the realm of law the courts and even the statues lean strongly in favour of finality of decisions legally and properly made. If the cases are reopened on flimsy grounds which have already been addressed by the courts then mere will be no end to the litigation. That is why, the power of review is restricted by given guidelines of the apex courts of the sub-continent.

27. Another vital aspect in respect of sentence of death for the offence of murder has been spelt out in the case of Rasedul Islam vs. State 68 DLR (AD) 114 which is as under:--
"Predictably the exceptions to section 300 of the Penal Code have no application in this case and the accused persons have also not taken any plea in this regard. When such an act which is eminently dangerous and must in all probability cause death is committed with knowledge mat death might be the probable result without any excuse,' the offence is murder. This clause applies only to a case of dangerous actions without intention to cause specific bodily injury to any person. The knowledge which accompanies the acts must be death. The act was so eminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death. The sentence provided for the offence of murder is death and only in extraneous circumstances, life sentence may be awarded. On consideration of the brutality of the incident, the High Court Division has rightly confirmed the sentence of death to the petitioners. No special reason is required to be assigned in awarding the death sentence if the offence attracts section 302. Since the sentence of death is the legal sentence for murder particularly if the murder is perpetrated cold-bloodedly and in the absence of any extenuating circumstances to commute the sentence, this Division has committed 'no error of law in maintaining' the petitioners' sentence. The accused petitioners were involved in heinous crime which was committed with inhuman brutality and the very nature of the incident called for no other than the extreme penalty provided in law. The enormity of the crimes and the gravity of the situation in which it was committed outweigh the consideration of other factors to consider the commutation of the sentence. As regards delay, it is now settled that mere delay is not a legal ground for commutation of the sentence."

28. But in the instant case, the learned Counsel for the petitioners argued the case, as if treating the case one as a regular appeal without attempting to make out a case one of error in the decision apparent on the face of the record or that the judgment is liable to be reviewed for any substantial reasons or any statutory provision was unnoticed in the impugned judgment.

29. From the nature of the offence it appears to us that the petitioner is in no way entitled to get any sympathy. We do not find any mitigating or extenuating circumstances on record for commutation of the sentence of death. Delay in the disposal of this case cannot by itself be a ground for commuting the sentence of death to one of imprisonment for life since the crime committed by the petitioner was premeditated senseless, dastardly and beyond all human reasonings.

30. On the question of confessional statements, this court has discussed the evidence thoroughly in support of the plea and disbelieved the defence plea. All points agitated by the learned counsels on behalf of the petitioners are not relevant for disposal of the review petition. The points raised by the learned counsels are reiteration of the points agitated at the time of hearing of the appeal.

31. In a recent decision of Md. Shukur Ali vs. the State 74 DLR (AD) 11 of this Division his lordship Mr. Obaidul Hassan, J. observed:
"We hold that confessional statement of a co-accused can be used against others non-confessing accused if there is corroboration of that statement by other direct or circumstantial evidence. In the instant case, the makers of the confessional statements vividly have stated the role played by other co-accused in the rape incident and murder of the deceased which is also supported/corroborated by the inquest report, postmortem report and by the depositions of the witnesses particularly the deposition of P.Ws. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 18 regarding the marks of injury on the body of the deceased. Every case should be considered in the facts and circumstances of that particular case. In light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the view that the confessional statement of a co-accused can be used for the purpose of crime control against other accused persons even if there is a little bit of corroboration of that confessional statement by any sort of evidence either direct or circumstantial. (Emphasis added). Thus, the accused namely Shukur and Sentu are equally liable like Azanur and Mamun for murdering the deceased after committing rape."

32. Further in the instant case his Lordship Mr. Hasan Foez Siddique, CJ maintained:
"There was no provocation and the manner in which the crime was committed was brutal. It is the legal obligation of the Court to award a punishment that is just and fair by administering justice tempered with such mercy not only as the criminal may justly deserve but also the right of the victim of the crime to have the assailant appropriately punished is protected. It also needs to meet the society's reasonable expectation from court for appropriate deterrent punishment conforming to the gravity of offence and consistent with the public abhorrence for the heinous offence committed by the convicts. It is unfortunate but a hard fact that appellants and petitioners have committed such a heinous and inhumane offence. The murder of a genius professor of the University has shocked the collective conscience of the Bangladeshi people. It has a magnitude of unprecedented enormity."

33. Culture of impunity and magnanimity in no way can over shadow the fathomless detestable offence that has been committed in this ill-fated ugly case. Mercy cannot be an option in such type of case.

34. We insist on accountability for gruesome violations of our penal law because that is how we defend the law and demonstrate our insistence on respect for the law going forward in a progressive legal system. If we tail to ensure accountability across the legal system by ending impunity, we risk undermining the very beneficial effects to which the nascent accountability drive that has built over the past decades. That is the final message we would wish to propel in adjudicating this significant criminal review espousing incidents that were horrendous and vile.

35. Fortified with the decisions and discussions as made above we are of the view that there is hardly any scope of rehearing of the matter afresh as a court of appeal in a review petition Further in the instant petition the learned counsel fails to point out any error in the judgment apparent on the face of the record. Therefore, all the review petitions merit no consideration and accordingly those are dismissed.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===


===75 DLR (AD) 1===
Appellate Division (Civil)
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Borhanuddin
Mr. Justice M. Enayetur Rahim
Mr. Justice Krishna Debnath

Civil Review Petition No. 08 of 2020.

(Arising out of civil petition for leave to appeal Nos. 971 of 2014)

(From the order dated the 24th day of November, 2016 passed by this Division in Civil Petition No. 971 of 2014)

Durnity Daman Commission VS Md Ashraful Haque and others

Judgement Date: June 30, 2022

Counsels:
Md. Khurshid Alam Khan, Senior Advocate instructed by M. Soyeb Khan, Advocate-on-Record
- For the Petitioner

Md SM Shajahan, Senior Advocate instructed by Shadhun Kumar Banik Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent No. 1.

None Represented
--- For the Responden Nos. 2-3.

Judgment
M. Enayetur Rahim, J: This review application under Article 105 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is directed against the order dated 24-11-2016 passed by this Division in civil petition for leave to appeal No. 971 of 2014 disposing the same with observations.

2. Facts, relevant for disposal of the review petition are as follows:

The present Respondent No. 1 (herein-after referred to as writ petitioner-respondent) filed writ petition No. 7314 of 2011 under article 102 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh before the High Court Division challenging the proceedings contain in Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ dated 7-8-2011 issued by the writ respondent No. 3 directing the writ petitioner-respondent to submit records in connection of his wealth statement.

3. In the writ petition it is contended that the writ respondent No: 3 as an inquiry officer issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/১৭৪৬ dated 19-10-2010 to the writ petitioner-respondent asking for submitting some records of wealth of the writ petitioner-respondent and to make appearance before him on 26-10-2010 at 10-00 am.

4.In response to the said notice/memo dated 19-10-2010 the writ petitioner-respondent submitted the written wealth statement before the writ respondent No. 3 on 7-11-2010 and accordingly the writ respondent No. 3 accepted the said written statement of wealth.

5.Thereafter, the writ respondent No. 2 issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/৬৫১ dated 24-4-2011 to the writ petitioner-respondent by exercising power under section 26(1) of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2004 asking him to submit his wealth statement.

6.Thereafter, the writ petitioner-respondent prayed time for submitting the statements of wealth on 23-5-2011 and 25-5-2011 respectively and the writ respondent No. 2 allowed 7 (seven) days time for submitting the same by his memo dated 31-5-2011.

7. Thereafter, the writ petitioner-respondent on 31-5-2011 submitted wealth statement before the writ respondent No. 2 along with his family members statements of wealth on prescribed form.

8. Eventually, the writ respondent No. 3 as an inquiry officer issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ dated 7-8-2011 to the writ petitioner-respondent asking him to submit some records of wealth and to make appearance before him on 16-8-2011 at 10-00 am.

9. Having received the above notice the writ petitioner-respondent challenged the same before the High Court Division by filing the above writ petition.

10. A Division Bench of the High Court Division initially issued a Rule Nisi and after hearing the Rule by its judgment and order dated 13-6-2013 discharged the Rule relying on the case of Md Shahidullah Mia vs Government of Bangladesh and others in connection with writ petition No. 940 of 2011.

11. Against the said judgment and order the writ petitioner-respondent filed civil petition for leave to appeal No. 971 of 2014 before this Division and this Division after hearing disposed of the same with the observations as under:

"The matter relates to issuance of notice upon the writ petition for submitting wealth statement. We noticed from the record that 3 (three) successive notices have been served upon the writ petitioner, of them, 2 notices were issued by the same officer of the Commission. If the Commission is not satisfied with the wealth statement, there is provision for filling case against the writ petitioner, but the Commission cannot issue repeated notice upon any person for submitting wealth statement. This is a malafide act on the part of Durnity Daman Commission. We direct the Chairman of Durnity Daman Commission to take legal action against the officers who intentionally issue such notices. The judgment of the High Court Division is quashed."
12. Feeling aggrieved by the above findings and observations, the writ respondent-Durnity Daman Commission (hereinafter referred. to as the Commission) has filed this review petition.

13. Mr Md Khurshid Alam Khan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the present petitioner submits that the issuance of notice for gathering information regarding the wealth statements is necessary for conducting the inquiry/investigation and, as such, issuance of successive notices do not mean harassment; hence, question of malafide act on the part of the Commission does not arise at all.

14. Mr Khan further submits that the impugned notice has been issued in view of section 19/20 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Ain, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as Ain, 2004) read with rule 20 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as Rules, 2007) and section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. There is no legal bar to issue successive notices for collecting information regarding the allegations made in the complaint and it is not possible for the Commission to ascertain whether the wealth is disproportionate to know source of the writ petitioner-respondent's income or not. and, as such, question of malafide act of the issuance of successive notices by the Commission does not arise at all and, as such, the impugned order is required to be reviewed.

15. However, Mr SM Shahjahan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the writ petitioner-respondent having supported the impugned order passed by this Division has submitted that in guise of inquiry or investigation, as the case may be a citizen cannot be harassed by the investigating agency i.e., the Commission.

16. We have heard the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the impugned order and notice as well as the relevant provision of law and Rules.

17. In the instant case the petitioner Commission served a notice on 7-8-2011 upon the writ petitioner-respondent, which was as under:

“দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন
সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয় ঢাকা-১
(দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন আইন-২০০৪ ও দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন বিধিমালা, ২০০৭!)

স্মারক নং-দুদক/সেজকা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ তারিখ-৭/৮/১১

প্রাপক,
জনাব মোঃ আশরাফুল হক
বাড়ী নং-৯, রোড নং-২৩এ,
সেকশন-১২বি, বনানী, ঢাকা-১২১৩

বিষয়: অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে তথ্যাদি সরবরাহ প্রসঙ্গে

সূত্র: দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন, সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয়, ঢাকা-১ এর ই/আর নং-৪৬/১১
অনুসন্ধানাধীন ব্যক্তি/ব্যক্তিবর্গের পরিচিতি এবং অভিযোগের সংক্ষিপ্ত বিবরণঃ
জনাব মোঃ আশরাফুল হক এর বিরুদ্ধে জ্ঞাত আয় বহির্ভূত সম্পদ অর্জনের অভিযোগ।

সূত্রে উল্লিখিত অভিযোগের সুষ্ঠু অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে নিম্নবর্ণিত রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র পর্যালোচনা করা একান্ত প্রয়োজন।

অতএব, আগামী ১৬-৮-২০১১ খ্রিঃ তারিখ ১০-০০ ঘটিকায় ঢাকা-১, এর নিকট নিম্নবর্ণিত রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র সরবরাহের জন্য আপনাকে বিশেষভাবে অনুরোধ করা হলো।

উল্লেখ্য যে, সংশ্লিষ্ট রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র যথাসময়ে আপনার নিকট/দপ্তরে ফেরত দেওয়া হবে। রেকর্ডপত্র হস্তান্তরের সময় উহার ছায়ালিপি আপনার নিকট/দপ্তরে রাখা যেতে পারে।

সংশ্লিষ্ট রেকর্ডপত্রের বিবরণঃ
গত ৩১-৫-২০১১ খ্রিঃ তারিখে সচিব, দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন, প্রধান কার্যালয়, ঢাকা বরাবর আপনার দাখিলকৃত সম্পদ বিবরণীতে বর্ণিত স্থাবর-অস্থাবর সম্পদের অর্জন ও উৎস সংক্রান্ত রেকর্ডপত্র।

মোঃ আনোয়ারুল হক
অনুসন্ধানকারী কর্মকর্তা ও সহকারী পরিচালক
দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন
সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয়, ঢাকা-১
মোবাঃ ০১৯১৮৯২৩৯০১”
18. Though High Court Division held that the Commission has got the power to issue such a notice but this Division by the impugned order did not endorse the said view, rather disposed of the same holding that if the Commission is not satisfied with the wealth statement there is provision of filing case against the writ petitioner, but the Commission cannot issue repeated notices upon any person for submitting wealth statement. This is a malafide act on the part of the Commission.

19. This Division further directed the Chairman of the Commission to take legal action against the officers who intentionally issued such notices and also quashed the judgment of the High Court Division.

20. To decide the issue involved in the case it is necessary to examine rule-8 & 11 of the Rules, 2007 which run as follows:

“৮। অনুসন্ধান কার্য চলাকালে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তির শুনানী গ্রহণ-
(১) দুর্নীতি বিষয়ক কোন অভিযোগের অনুসন্ধান চলাকালে কমিশন বা কমিশন কর্তৃক ক্ষমতা প্রাপ্ত কোন কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা যদি মনে করে যে, অভিযোগের সহিত সংশ্লিষ্ট ব্যক্তির বক্তব্য শ্রবণ করা প্রয়োজন তাহা হইলে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তিকে লিখিত নোটিশ প্রদান করিয়া নোটিশে উল্লিখিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিবার সুযোগ প্রদান করিতে পারিবে।
(২) উপ-বিধি (১) এর অধীন নোটিশ প্রাপ্ত ব্যক্তি তাহার বিরুদ্ধে আনীত অভিযোগ খণ্ডন করিয়া নোটিশে নির্দেশিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে ব্যক্তিগতভাবে বা তাহার নিয়োজিত আইনজীবীসহ মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিতে পারিবে এবং উক্তরূপে বক্তব্য পেশ করা হইলে সংশ্লিষ্ট কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা উহা সংশ্লিষ্ট নথিতে অন্তর্ভুক্ত করিবেন।”
...
“১১। তদন্ত কার্য চলাকালে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তির শুনানী গ্রহণ-
(১) দুর্নীতি বিষয়ক কোন অভিযোগের অনুসন্ধান শেষ হওয়ার পর অভিযোগ প্রাথমিকভাবে প্রতিষ্ঠিত হইলে তদন্ত চলাকালে কমিশন যদি মনে করে যে, অভিযোগের সহিত সংশ্লিষ্ট ব্যক্তির বক্তব্য লিখিত নোটিশ প্রদান করিয়া নোটিশে উল্লিখিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিবার সুযোগ প্রদান করিতে পারিবে।
(২) উপ-বিধি (১) এর অধীন নোটিশ প্রাপ্ত ব্যক্তি তাহার বিরুদ্ধে আনীত অভিযোগ খণ্ডন করিয়া নোটিশে নির্দেশিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে ব্যক্তিগতভাবে বা তাহার নিয়োজিত আইনজীবীসহ মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিতে পারিবে এবং উক্তরূপে বক্তব্য পেশ করা হইলে সংশ্লিষ্ট কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা উহা সংশ্লিষ্ট নথিতে অন্তর্ভুক্ত করিবেন।”
21. From the above rules it is abundantly clear that in course of inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, the Commission has got the power to issue notice upon the person(s) against whom an inquiry or investigation is going on to appear before the Commission for giving him a chance to hear and to place or submit his written or verbal statement and connecting documents with regard to the allegation brought against him.

22. The provision of section 26 of the Ain, 2004 is as follows:

"Declaration of assets.—
(1) Whenever the Commission, on any information and after conducting such [inquiry] as it may deem necessary, is satisfied that any person or any other person on his behalf is in possession or has acquired any property disproportionate to his legal source of income, the Commission may, by order in writing, direct that person to furnish statement of his assets and liabilities including any other information specified in that order in the manner prescribed by the Commission.
(2) If any person—
(a) fails to submit a written statement or an information in compliance with the order mentioned under sub-section (1) after receipt of the same or submits any written statement or any information which for sufficient reasons is considered false or baseless, or
(b) submits any book, accounts, record, declaration, return or any document under sub-section (1) or gives any statement which, for sufficient reasons, is considered false or baseless,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 3 (three) years, or with fine, or with both."
23. If, we meticulously examine the above provision, then it will be crystal clear that prior giving notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 the commission has got the power to make an inquiry. Further, the Commission, if after receiving the statement furnished by the concerned person(s) pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 is not satisfied, then as per rule 6 of the Rules, 2007 the Commission for the purpose of holding inquiry is empowered to appoint an inquiry officer, and in course of inquiry the Commission or concerned officer as authorized to do so is also empowered to issue notice as per provision of rule 8 of the Rules, 2007 upon the concerned person(s) for the purpose of inquiry asking him to submit or place his written or verbal submissions and the relevant documents.

24. Thus, notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 and notice for the purpose of inquiry in view of rule 8 of the Rules, 2007 is quite different and distinguishable.

25. Upon perusal of the notice, impugned before the High Court Division, Annexure-F to the writ petition it reveals that in the notice subject matter of the notice (বিষয়) has been described as ‘বিষয়: অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে তথ্যাদি সরবরাহ প্রসঙ্গে’ And in the said notice the writ petitioner-respondent was asked to provide the documents in support of his wealth statement submitted pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004.

26. So, it is clear that the notice has been issued upon the writ petitioner-respondent for the purpose of proper and effective inquiry and the writ petitioner-respondent was asked to submit/provide the documents in support of his wealth statement submitted before the commission in pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Act, 2004.

27. We have no hesitation to hold that this procedure of inquiry by the Commission is very fair, transparent and accountable and this procedure is for the benefit of the person(s) against whom an inquiry is going on. In course of inquiry the concerned person(s) is getting chance of being heard before the inquiry officer to defend himself. Similarly, after filling of the case during investigation period Rule 11 of the Rules, 2007 provides similar provision for defending an accused in an investigation process.

28. Further, section 19 of the Act, 2004 has empowered the Commission to do anything prescribed for carrying out of purpose of the Ain, 2004.

29. Section 19 of the Ain, 2004 runs as follows:

"19. Special Powers of the Commission in respect of inquiry or investigation.—
(1) The Commission shall have the following powers in respect of inquiry and investigation, namely:—
(a) to issue [notice to witnesses] and ensure attendance thereof and to examine witnesses;
(b) to detect and produce any document;
(c) to take evidence;
(d) to call for public records or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) to issue [notice] for examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) to do anything prescribed for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may require any person to furnish any information regarding a matter of inquiry or investigation and the person so required shall be bound to furnish such information kept under his custody.
(3) if any person causes resistance to any officer legally empowered by the Commission or a Commissioner in exercise of his powers under sub-section (1), or deliberately disobeys any direction given under that sub-section, it shall be a punishable offence and for such offence he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 (three) years, or with fine, or with both."
30. It is our considered view that the word `any person' used in section 19(2) includes the person(s) against whom inquiry or investigation as the case may he is going on.

31. Similar provision, like section 19 of the Ain, 2004 has also been made in rule 20 of the Rules, 2007 empowering the inquiry/investigating officer to take following measures—

ক্রমিক নং	কমিশনের বিশেষ ক্ষমতা	ক্ষমতা প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা
১ (ক)	সাক্ষীর প্রতি নোটিশ জারি ও উপস্থিতি নিশ্চিতকরণ এবং জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করা	অনুসন্ধান কার্যের দায়িত্ব প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা, বা তদন্ত কার্যের দায়িত্ব প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা, যে ক্ষেত্রে যাহা প্রযোজ্য
২ (খ)	কোন দলিল উদঘাটন এবং উপস্থাপন করা
৩ (গ)	কোন অফিস হইতে পাবলিক রেকর্ড বা উহার অনুলিপি তলব করা
৪ (ঘ)	আইনের উদ্দেশ্য পূরণকল্পে নির্ধারিত অন্য যে কোন বিষয়
32. If we meticulously examine the above two provisions i.e., section 19 of the Act, 2004 and 20 of Rules; 2007, coupled with rule 8 and 11 of the above Rules, then we have no hesitation to hold that those provisions have been made for the interest and benefit of a person(s) against whom an inquiry or investigation is going on as he is giving opportunity to defend himself in inquiry or investigation stage. Thus, there is no room to say that issuance of such notice by the Commission or its authorized officer is harassing, malafide and prejudiced to the concerned person(s).

33. Earlier, in disposing the leave petition this Division did not take into consideration the above provisions of law and Rules and thus, came to a erroneous decision, which is apparent on the face of the record.

34. Thus, impugned order is reviewed. Findings and observations made in the order are hereby expunged. The order of quashment of the proceedings and directing the Commission to take legal action against the officers who issued the notices are set-aside.

Accordingly, the review petition is disposed of.

End.

"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."

===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 278===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal Nos. 53-54 of 2013

Decided On: 01.02.2023

The Chairman, Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Parvin and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., M. Enayetur Rahim and Jahangir Hossain, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sheikh Reajul Hoque, Advocate instructed by Madhumalati Chowdhwy Barua, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Murad Reza, Senior Advocate instructed by Syed Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 42, Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 55, Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 56

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Decree dated the 01.12.2011 passed by the High Court Division in First Appeal Nos. 184 and 183 of 2008

Result:
Appeal Dismissed

JUDGMENT
Jahangir Hossain, J.

1. Both the appeals have arisen out of the common judgment and decree of the High Court Division. This Division has also heard both the appeals analogously and disposed of the same by a single judgment.

2. These two civil appeals, by leave, are directed against the judgment and decree dated the 1st day of December, 2011 passed by the High Court Division in First Appeal Nos. 183 and 184 of 2008 allowing the appeals.

3. The relevant facts for disposal of these civil appeals, in short, are that plaintiff-respondent, Dr. Md Abdul Malek filed Title Suit No. 39 of 2004 and plaintiff-respondent, Begum Parvin filed Title Suit No. 40 of 2004 both in the Court of Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Dhaka, alleging, inter alia, that they had joined Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research [BCSIR] on 27-12-1980 as Research Officer and on 13-11-1981 as Research Zoologist and the authority with satisfaction got them promoted as Senior Scientific Officers on 24-8-1990 and on 30-3-1988. They had been serving there for 23[twenty three] years and 22[twenty two] years respectively without violating any rules and regulations of BCSIR. Both the plaintiff-respondents applied to visit Canada from 1-2-2002 to 30-4-2002 at their own costs and they were accordingly granted permission by the authority to visit Canada. After going there, they became sick because of adverse cold weather prevailing in Canada. While sick, they had applied from Canada for extension of leave for further one year and the defendant-appellants had received their applications in due time. They sent the applications through registered mail. The pro-forma defendant Nos. 4 and 5 made assurance to the plaintiff-respondents for granting extension of leave by a fax message on 28-9-2003. Thereafter, on 19-11-2003, they came back to Dhaka in order to perform the ritual following the death of the mother of plaintiff-respondent, Dr. Md Abdul Malek and then went to the office of BCSIR and came to know that they were dismissed from their respective service on 23-9-2003 by a letter under reference Further case of the plaintiff-respondents is that no show cause notice was issued upon them by the defendant-appellants and in spite of knowing the fact that the respondents were staying in Canada, the defendant-appellants deliberately abstained from sending any letter or show cause notice to their address in Canada and had fabricated many documents with the intention to dismiss them from their respective service. They got no opportunity to defend their case and, as such, the order of dismissal is absolutely against the principle of natural justice and they have been dismissed under that law which is not applicable to their case. Hence, they filed the suits with prayer that the letter described in the schedule to the plaint to be declared illegal and also to declare that the respondents are still in the service of the appellants from 30-4-2002 and to pay them necessary costs and to grant any other reliefs as they are entitled to as per law and equity.

4. The defendant-appellants by filing written statement denying all the material allegations, contending, inter alia, that the suits are not maintainable in the present form. There were no causes of action for filing the suits. The suits are barred by limitation as well as by the principles of waiver and acquiescence. The main contention of the appellants is that in the letter dated 12-1-2002 by which the respondents were granted leave, there was a condition that under no circumstances the leave should be extended. The appellants further contend that they sent letters to the respondents in Canada and asked them to join their respective service and they had also issued notices and second show cause notice in the newspapers as per applicable rules, but in spite of expiry of the period of leave, the respondents were illegally staying in Canada and, as such, the order of dismissal was lawful and the respondents cannot get any relief in the suits.

5. During the trial in Title Suit No. 39 of 2004, the plaintiff-respondent examined him-self as PW 1 and produced some documents in support of his case which were marked as exhibit Nos. 1 to 9. The appellants examined one Md Shamsul Haque, Administrative Officer of BCSIR, as DW 1 to support their case and produced certain documents which were marked as exhibit Nos. Ka to Jha. While in Title Suit No. 40 of 2004, the plaintiff-respondent examined herself as PW 1 and produced some relevant papers in support of her case, which were marked as Exhibit Nos. 1 to 20. The appellants examined the aforesaid Administrative Officer, BCSIR, as DW 1 to support their case and produced certain documents which were marked as exhibit Nos. Ka to Jha.

6. The trial Court, after having heard the parties and assessed the evidence on record, dismissed the suits by its judgments and decrees dated 24-4-2008. Feeling aggrieved by the judgments and decrees of the trial Court, the present-respondents as appellants preferred First Appeal Nos. 183 of 2008 and 184 of 2008 before the High Court Division. The learned Judges of the High Court Division having heard the appeals analogously allowed them.

7. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree of the High Court Division, the defendant-appellants preferred the aforesaid civil appeals arisen out of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 1187-88 of 2012 before this Division.

8. Mr. Sheikh Reajul Hoque, learned Advocate, appearing for the appellants, submits that plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed the suits for declaration that the order of dismissal from service is illegal and they are still in service but have not prayed for any direction for their reinstatement and thereby the suits are not maintainable. He further adds that the learned Judges of the High Court Division failed to appreciate that the plaintiff-respondents joined the BCSIR before enforcement of and the authority of BCSIR rightly dismissed plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 after following all legal formalities as provided in the law.

9. On the contrary, Mr. Murad Reza, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, contends that without issuing any show cause notice, the appellants, BCSIR, most illegally dismissed them from service in violation of the principle of natural justice by depriving them from getting any opportunity to defend themselves against the allegations brought in. He further contends that the authority of BCSIR was fully aware of the address of the plaintiff-respondents in Canada, but they hopelessly failed to bring any evidence before the Court below to show that they issued the notices asking the plaintiff-respondents to join their respective services. He also contends that the impugned letter dated 29-3-2003 [Exhibit 8] was issued under section 3(b) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 and the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed under 4(A) of the said Ordinance. The plaintiff-respondents were not Government Servants, rather employees of BCSIR, their dismissal from respective services under the provisions of Government Servants (Special Provision) Ordinance, 1979 is void ab-initio. He finally contends that while the plaintiff-respondents fell ill in Canada, they sent applications on 18-2-2002 to the defendant-appellants praying for extension of leave from 1-4-2002 to 30-4-2003 and the defendant-appellants, the then Chairman of BCSIR having received the same vide a fax message dated 28-9-2003 assured the plaintiff-respondents that their prayers for leave would be granted but the same was not subsequently considered by the authority and, as such, the instant appeals are liable to be dismissed.

10. Heard the contentions of the learned Advocates for both the parties and perused the materials along with other connected papers on record.

11. It reveals from the relevant documents on record that the plaintiff-respondents are husband and wife. Both of them were appointed in BCSIR on different dates. They went to Canada taking 3 [three] months' ex-Bangladesh leave from 1-2-2002 to 30-4-2002 to visit their relatives. In the approval letters of leave of the plaintiff-respondents, there were some conditions to the effect that under no circumstances, the leave should be extended. Admittedly, both the plaintiff-respondents after going there fell ill because of adverse cold weather in Canada and during their illness, they applied to defendant-appellants No. 2 to extend their leave from 1-5-2002 to 30-4-2003, i.e. for l[one] year. Thereafter, they applied for 2[two] years' medical leave from 1-5-2003 to 30-4-2005. In total, they prayed for 3[three] years' leave. Defendant-appellants No. 2 assured them to grant the prayers for leave. The trial Court opined that the plaintiff-respondents should have returned home making their leave short because of adverse cold weather in Canada. Here, the trial Court failed to realize the reason of their not coming back to Bangladesh and to resume their work in the office. They submitted medical report which was not satisfactory to the trial Court. It appears that the plaintiff-respondents participated in a project extended for 3 [three] months and consumed 3[three] months' leave in Canada involved themselves in different personal activities. They reiterated that they had been ill. It is also revealed from the findings of the trial Court that the defendant-appellants sent letters dated 29-7-2002 asking them to return home and join the service within 15[fifteen] days, otherwise, their service will be terminated as per Government Servants [Special Provisions] Ordinance, 1979. They sent two show cause notices first on 28-11-2002 and second on 8-1-2003. The show cause notices were also published in the daily newspapers. But the plaintiff-respondents as alleged did not respond to the notices. Thereafter, in the 154th Board Meeting of the Council held on 28-7-2003, the Board took decision to dismiss the plaintiff-respondents from their respective services. Therefore, the Council dismissed them from respective services on 23-9-2003. In overall observation of the trial Court, it is revealed that the plaintiff-respondents showed negligence in joining their respective services and disobedience to the letters of the defendant-appellants. Moreover, they did not show cogent grounds for extending their leave. They only prayed that they were ill for adverse cold weather. The trial Court further observed that as there was no cold weather in Bangladesh, they would have returned in Bangladesh shortening their leave and then they would come round. It is also observed that they first took ex-Bangladesh leave for visiting their relatives only.

12. It reveals that Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Ordinance, 1978 has been established under section 3(1) of the Ordinance as a statutory public body. According to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3, the Council shall be a body corporate. The Council is an entity distinct from the Government. It has been enshrined in section-3 of the Ordinance, 1978 that:

"3.(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Ordinance, the Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, establish a Council to be called the Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, (2) The Council shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and shall be said name sue [sic] and be sued."
13. In section 18 of the Ordinance, 1978, the Council has been authorized to appoint its own officers and employees. It has been envisaged in section-18 that:

"The Council may, subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf and the availability of budgetary provisions, create such posts and appoint, on such terms and conditions as it may determine such officers, consultants, advisers, auditors and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Ordinance:

Provided that no post carrying a monthly initial pay of Taka sixteen hundred or above shall be created without the approval of the Government."
14. The provisions of section 28 of the Ordinance, 1978 delegates to the Council powers, with previous approval of the Government to make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which provisions are necessary or expedient to give effect to the provisions of the Ordinance. BCSIR has accordingly framed a service Regulations, in 1989 for its employees which was published in Bangladesh Gazette dated Monday, January 9, 1989. It has been enunciated in section 28 that:

"(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and the rules, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Ordinance.

(2) All regulations made under this section shall be published in the official Gazette and shall come into force on such publication."
15. In Chapter two, regulation No. 3 deals with the procedure of appointments; in Chapter four, regulation No. 16 deals with the procedure of various kinds of leave, regulation No. 29 deals with the procedure of returning from leave; in Chapter seven, regulation No. 37 deals with ordinary conduct and discipline, regulation No. 39 deals with the procedure of various sorts of penalties, regulation No. 42 deals with the procedure of inquiry of severe penalty, regulation No. 45 deals with the procedure of re-instatement, regulation No. 47 deals with the procedure of appeal against any order.

16. Having examined the impugned letters both dated 29-3-2003 marked as Exhibit 8, by which the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed, that these letters were issued under section 3(b) of Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 and they were dismissed under section 4(A) of the said Ordinance. It is apparent that the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed from their respective service by following the procedure and in exercise of the powers with reference to the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979. It appears that BCSIR is a statutory public body and is an entity different from government. As per provisions of section 18 of the above mentioned Ordinance, the Council shall appoint its own officers and employees. It is clear that these two plaintiff-respondents were employees of BCSIR and they were not government servants. Being distinct entity, BCSIR has adopted a regulation on 8-1-1989 with previous approval of the government and in exercise of the power delegated under section 28 of the above Ordinance, being Chapter-7, containing regulation Nos. 37 to 48, makes provisions regarding conduct and discipline of the employees of BCSIR. It is observed that at the time when the notices were published in the newspapers, the regulations, prescribing specific provisions regarding disciplinary action, were very much in force and were also applicable in respect of the plaintiff-respondents. Although the plaintiff-respondents were not government servants, rather admittedly, they were servants/employees of BCSIR. It is found that the disciplinary proceedings initiated with reference to the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 along with issuance of the charge-sheets under section 3 of the said Ordinance and issuance of the letters of dismissal rendered with reference to section 4 of the said Ordinance are void ab-initio. But without resorting to the provisions of these regulations, the BCSIR authority has resorted to the procedure laid down in Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979.

17. On perusal of the record, it is revealed that the relief prayed in the suit does not come within the scope of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The plaintiff-respondents did not ask for any direction in the form of mandatory injunction seeking re-instatement. Admittedly, plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have not prayed for their re-instatement in service with arrear rather the relief sought for being in declaratory form and the trial Court found that such relief is not available to the plaintiff-respondents even though they have a good case for directing reinstatement. In the contentions of the learned Advocate for the defendant-appellants, it appears that the result of the instant suit is a decree without any consequential relief, i.e. without reinstatement in the service and arrear though the consequential relief is a mandatory provision of law and since the principle of mandatory injunction settled by this Division in the case of Rupali Bank Ltd. vs Md Arab Ali and others, reported in 7 BLC (AD) 1 and Jahir Uddin (Md) vs Rupali Bank Ltd. and others reported in 12 BLC (AD) 114, and Bangladesh Tobacco Company Limited and another vs Md Azizul Huq and another, reported in 8 MLR (AD) 149 : 7 BLC (AD) 119. In the case of Osman Gani Mondal vs Mainuddin Ahmed and others, reported in 27 DLR (AD) 61 wherein this Division held that it is a cardinal rule of construction that where statutory restrictions are couched in negative terms, they are almost invariably held to be mandatory and in another decision of the case of Aminul Islam and others vs M/s. James Finlay and Company Limited, Khulna, reported in 26 DLR (SC) 33, this Court held that it is needless to say that difficulties are sometimes felt to determine whether a certain provision of statute is directory or mandatory, when the legislature itself expresses its opinion as to. the consequence of non-compliance with a certain direction, no difficulty arises and from the book namely 'Interpretation of Statutes and Documents' written by Mr. Mahmudul Islam [Page-238; Mandatory and directory provision] wherein it is stated, "where a statute requires something to be done or to be done in a particular manner and the consequences of failure to do so are also provided, no difficulty arises and the provision is construed as mandatory" and from above decision, it has been settled that the proviso of section 42 of Specific Relief Act is a mandatory provision by following the provision of section 55 of the Specific Relief Act.

18. It has been enshrined in section 42 of the Specific Relief Act that:

"Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the Court may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief:

Bar to such declaration-Provided that no Court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek further relief than a mere declaration of tide, omits to do so.
19. It has been enumerated in section 55 of the Specific Relief Act that:

"When, to prevent the breach of an obligation, it is necessary to compel the performance of certain acts which the Court is capable of enforcing, the Court may, in its discretion, grant an injunction to prevent the breach complained of, and also to compel performance of the requisite acts."
20. It is earlier discussed that BCSIR is a statutory body and it has its own individuality and separate entity which is to run following its own rules and regulations. It is found that the plaintiff-respondents had been dismissed from their services after taking decision of the Board of BCSIR upon recording the reasons thereon, but the proceeding drawn upon them and the notices published in the newspaper with the provisions of Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 is not concurrent with the rules and regulations of BCSIR.

21. The learned Advocate for the defendant-appellants in support of his contentions placed some references including the case of Osman Gani Mondal vs Mainuddin Ahmed and others, reported in 27 DLR (AD) 61, where it was held that:

"Thus the above contentions revolve round the question whether the second proviso to paragraph 7 of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution is mandatory or directory. It could not be disputed that, in general, the provisions in a Constitution should be regarded as mandatory where such construction is possible; Seen in this connection, the observation of Wynes in his "Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia," Fourth Edition, page 28. This observation, with which we are in complete agreement is based on Colley pp 154-155, Black's "Interpretation." pp. 21-22 Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd Edn Vol. 31, pp-529 and following, and also a number of reported decisions. Seen also Sutherland's "Statutory Construction", 3rd Ed, Vol. 3, section 5807 which says that as a general proposition there is greater likelihood that constitutional provisions will be given mandatory effect, and that 'such a construction accords with the generally acknowledged import of constitutional fiat; that its character is such as to require absolute compliance in all cases without exception." It has been further explained that concepts of constitutional supremacy furnish reasonable grounds for "a presumption that the framers of a Constitution intended that just such efficacy be given to it."

Besides, the second proviso to the seventh paragraph of the Fourth Schedule has been cast in a negative or prohibitory form. It is a cardinal rule of construction that where statutory restrictions are couched in negative terms, they are almost invariably held to be mandatory: Sutherland, 3rd edition, Volume 3, p. 96, section 5814 which notes that "there is but one way to obey the command 'thou shall not,' and that is to refrain altogether from doing the forbidden act." This principle has been stated in Crawford's "Statutory Construction", page 516, section 261 in the following words:

"It is a rule of statutory construction that where a statute is framed in terms of command, and there is no indication from the nature of wording of the act or the surrounding circumstances that it is to receive a permissive interpretation, it will be construed as peremptory;" and again in section 263 at page 523 thereof it has been said: "Prohibitive or negative words can rarely, if ever, be directory, or, as it has been aptly stated, there is but one way to obey the command thou shall not', and that is to completely refrain from doing the forbidden Act. And this is so, even though the statute provides no penalty for disobedience. Accordingly, negative, prohibitory and exclusive words or terms are indicative of the legislative intent that the statute is to be mandatory,..."
22. In the case of Aminul Islam vs James Finlay and Company Limited, reported in 26 DLR (SC) 33 wherein it was held that:

"The moot question is whether the advice of the members of the Court is mandatory in making the award. Needless to say that difficulties are sometimes felt to determine whether a certain provision of statute is directory or mandatory. When the legislature itself expresses its opinion as to the consequence of non-compliance with a certain direction, no difficulty arises but in a case where the legislature does not indicate its mind as to the consequence of violation of such direction, the Court is to consider whether the direction is merely directory or mandatory and this is to be determined on the construction of the provision in question and the importance attached to the direction therein. As noticed earlier, rule 34 provides that the Chairman while giving an award shall consider the advice given to him the rule does not require the Chairman to follow the members to obtain their advice in any manner it is possible. It will be sufficient for the Chairman if he seeks the advice of the members. If any member intentionally refuses to give advice the Chairman has got no authority to impose any penalty upon him for his non-compliance with the rule. The question of consideration of the advice by the Chairman arises only when the advice is given. The rule is silent as regard the consequence of non-compliance. This clearly indicates that no special importance is attached to the direction as regards advice."
23. In the case of Jahir Uddin vs Rupali Bank Ltd. and others, reported in 12 BLC (AD) 115, it was held that:

"As it appears the High Court Division made the Rule absolute holding that admittedly, on and from 6-4-1984 the defendant bank, being denationalized, was converted into a private bank incorporated under the Companies Act, 1994 and, as such, the relationship between the plaintiff-petitioner and the defendant bank became that of master and servant from that date and therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to get a decree for declaration without consequential relief; in the instant case there is no prayer for mandatory injunction for consequential relief; even if there is a prayer for mandatory injunction but that too cannot be granted in view of legal bar under clause (e) of section 56 of the Specific Relief Act which provides that an order of mandatory injunction cannot be granted to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of which could not be specifically enforced; the breach of contract for personal service cannot be restrained by court ordering an employer to retain the employee in the service as it is the prerogative right of the employer to discharge his employee and the Court cannot compel a person against his will to employ any person and the employer bank is liable for damage and compensation in terms of Service Rules and Regulations; the suit is not maintainable as the plaintiff challenged the order of suspension and the final show cause notice but did not challenge the order of dismissal in which the impugned order of suspension and show cause merged and with the order of dismissal[sic] the orders of suspension and final show cause became infructuous and in the instant case this issue, which cuts the case at its root, has not been considered at all by the appellate Court below."
24. From the submission of the learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondents, it is found that BCSIR was established under section 3(1) of the Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Ordinance, 1978 as statutory public body. BCSIR has framed a Service Regulations in 1989 which is known as Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Employees Service Regulations, 1989. Under regulation 1(2), it will be applied for its permanent employees. Regulation No. 55 of the above mentioned Regulation refers that "By Laws" regulating the service of the plaintiff-respondents was repealed by the said Regulation. It is found that the plaintiff-respondents joined as Research Officer on 27-12-1980 and as Research Zoologist on 13-11-1981. According to regulation 1(2) of the above said Regulations, the provisions of the Regulations are applicable for the plaintiff-respondents. Previously, the employees of the BCSIR were guided by "By Laws", which has been repealed by regulation No. 55 of the said Regulation, enacted in 1989. They are the employees of BCSIR. Regulation Nos. 37 to 48 of the Service Regulations, 1989 laid down the provisions regarding conduct and discipline of the employees of BCSIR but without following the same, the notices were published and charge-sheets were issued under section 3 of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979. Hence, the said notices or charge-sheets are not valid in the eye of law. It is further appeared that the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed under section 4(A) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 from their respective service by following the procedure and in exercise of the powers with reference to the said Ordinance, which is applicable for the government servants. The above mentioned Regulation of BCSIR has not been included to the schedule of the Administrative Tribunal Act and, as such, there is no bar to file the suits in the civil court.

25. The contentions of the learned Advocate on behalf of the plaintiff-respondents in the case of Bangladesh Water Development Board, represented by its Chairman vs Syed Moazzem Hossain and others, reported in 1995 BLD (AD) 239 : 1 BLC (AD) 13, in which it was held that:

"A Declaratory suit need not be confined within the terms of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act which is meant for obtaining a specific relief. A declaration can be sought for various other matters as well."
26. It is found from close reading of the aforesaid decision reported in 1995 BLD (AD) 239 : 1 BLC (AD) 13 and 7 BLT(AD) 361 that the suit for simple declaration is maintainable in respect of service matter without any prayer for consequential relief. It has been held therein that a declaratory suit need not be confined in the terms of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act.

27. In the case of Jiban Bima Corporation, Dhaka vs Mustafa Hussain and another, reported in : 50 DLR 411, it was held that:

"A declaratory decree passed in a case without any prayer for consequential relief is an "annuity". Such decree is a gain and its implementation is dependent on as to whom the decree is passed against. In the instant case, the defendant being a statutory Corporation, there is no reason to believe that such corporation will not implement the decision of the court"
28. Section 2(AA) of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1980 defines statutory public authority in respect of which Administrative Tribunal Act will be applicable. Section 2(AA) of the Act reads as follows:

"statutory public authority" means an authority, corporation, or body specific in the schedule to this Act."
29. The main contentions of the learned Advocate for the plaintiff-respondents are that the respondents are not government servants, they are employees of a statutory body, BCSIR and, as such, the dismissal is illegal in the eye of law as contrary to the service regulations. Therefore, the High Court Division rightly allowed the appeals observing that the impugned letters of dismissal are void ab-initio because the plaintiff-respondents were not government servants, they are the permanent employees of BCSIR. They should have been notified by and proceedings should have been drawn according to the said Probidhimala. Admittedly, it is seen from section 1 of the Regulation titled.

30. Under the circumstances, it appears that the plaintiff-respondents are the permanent employees of BCSIR and in their case, the provisions of the above Regulations shall operate. The defendant-appellants without resorting the existing regulations of the BCSIR, they resorted to the Government Servants Ordinance, 1979.

31. The plaintiff-respondents claimed that before dismissal from their respective service, they were not served any show cause notices, though the defendant-appellants claimed that they served show cause notices and the notices were also duly published in the daily newspapers but the plaintiff-respondents refused any kind of service of notices. It appears from the record that the first show cause notice under section 3(B) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 dated 28-11-2002 was served giving 5[five] days' time and the second show cause notice under section 5(2) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 dated 21-1-2003 was served giving 3[three] days' time. As the plaintiff-respondents are the permanent employees of BCSIR, the procedure of serving notice shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations and otherwise, the procedures are left to be followed illegally. Apart from this, Dw-1, in cross-examination, admitted that he had no knowledge whether the notices were served upon the plaintiff-respondents or not. It is revealed that the inquiry was held without having any knowledge of the plaintiff-respondents and the dismissal from service without affording opportunity of defence is illegal and arbitrary being violative of the principle of natural justice. It is also revealed that all the procedures of servicing notices, inquiry and dismissal had taken place under the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 but it is obvious that the plaintiff-respondents are the employees of Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. It is our considered view that the defendant-appellants adopted wrong forum to dismiss the plaintiff-respondents from their services.

32. On consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, we are of the view that the High Court Division is justified in allowing the appeals

Accordingly, both the appeals are dismissed without any order as to costs. However, for the period, the plaintiff-respondents were out of service shall be treated as leave without pay.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."

===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 288===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 413 of 2019

Decided On: 07.06.2023

Shuvash Chandra Dhar
... Vs. ...
Milon Chandra Banik and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, M. Enayetur Rahim and Md. Ashfaqul Islam, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Probir Neogi, Senior Advocate instructed by Taufique Hossain, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Subrata Chowdhury, Senior Advocate and M. Qumrul Hoque Siddique, Advocate instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record

Relevant Section:
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Order XXIII Rule 1(3); CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Order VII Rule 11(d), CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Section 115; TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882 - Section 52

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order VII Rule 11; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order VII Rule 11(d); Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XXIII Rule 1; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XXIII Rule 1(3); Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 11; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 115; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 150; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 151; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 145; Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 42; Transfer Of Property Act, 1882 - Section 52

Result:
Appeal Dismissed

JUDGMENT
Md. Ashfaqul Islam, J.

1. This civil appeal by leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016 making the Rule absolute and rejecting the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 (hereinafter referred to as the present suit), after setting aside order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 passed by the Joint District Judge of the 1st Court, Chattogram in the said Suit.

2. The present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar, as plaintiff on 1-12-2014 instituted Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 in the 1st Court- of Joint District Judge, Chattogram against the present respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and 11 others for (a) Determination of title, (b) Right to use pond under joint possession with other co-sharers, (c) Decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 does not bar in possession of the suit land by the plaintiff and (d) the defendants are not entitled to take any action against the plaintiff in Execution Case No. 1 of 2014, contending, inter-alia that, 0.2150 acre of land described in the schedule to the plaint, including part of pond and homestead, belonged to two brothers named Kashi Mohon and Ananta Mohan, which was recorded in their names in RS Khatian. The said two brothers were members of Hindu Joint Family. Kashi Mohon died leaving behind Porikkhit Banik (Proforma defendant No. 3 in the suit) as his heir. Later on Ananta Mohon died child less leaving the said Porikkhit Banik. By peaceful possession on the suit land for a very long time Porikhhit Banik acquired a better title by adverse possession as well; that, PS and BS Khatian were correctly prepared in his name. Porikkhit Banik sold the suit land to the plaintiff Suvas Chandra Dhar by registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Since purchase the plaintiff is in possession of the suit land.

3. On 27-6-2014 the defendants No. 1 and 2 disclosed that they got decree in a suit for specific performance of contract, which has been affirmed by higher Court and asked the plaintiff to vacate the suit land else they will evict him through execution case.

4. To prevent them the plaintiff on 3-7-2014 filed case No. 1234 of 2014 under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The plaintiff has come to know that the defendants No. 1 and 2 obtained decree in suit for specific performance of oral contract for sale of land and it transpires that the said decree was obtained by practicing fraud on Court. The plaintiff came to know about the fraudulent decree of the defendants 1 and 2 on 15-11-2014 and hence he filed the suit.

5. On 25-1-2015, the defendants No. 1 and 2 appeared by filing written statement and thereafter fired an application praying for rejection of the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 contending, inter alia, that the suit property originally belonged to Mohendra Lal Dey who died leaving behind three sons namely, Kali Shankar Dey, Hari Shankar Dey and Narayan Chandra Dey as his heirs to inherit the property left behind by their father, Mohendra Lal Dey. Kali Shankar Dey and his two brothers on 7-12-1989 being in need of money, entered into an agreement for sale of the said property with Sudhir Chandra Banik (father of the defendants No. 1 and 2) but subsequently, when Kali Shankar Dey and his brothers having refused to execute the kabala, Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 instituted Other Suit No. 45 of 1990 against recorded tenants of the holding, which on successive transfer was lastly renumbered as Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 and was decreed. The said decree was reversed in other Appeal No. 521 of 1992 but the decree was restored in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 and affirmed by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 81 of 2011. The decree has been put into execution in Other Execution Case No. 1 of 2014.

6. Porikkhit Banik predecessor in interest of the defendants No. 10 to 12 had instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 for determination of title and confirmation of possession, which on transfer was re-numbered as Other Suit No. 91 of 1995 and was decreed. Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendants No. 1 and 2 preferred Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996, which was allowed and the decree was reversed. Porikkhit Banik preferred Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 against the said appellate decree but anticipating defeat later on he withdrew the said Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999. The plaintiff of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar deposed as DW 2 in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 but now he has instituted the suit suppressing all the past events.

7. The plaintiff contested the said application by filing written objection. By order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 the trial Court was pleased to reject the application for rejection of plaint finding inter alia that the question of res judicata argued as a ground for rejection of plaint is a mixed question of fact and law, which can be decided only at trial on evidence.

8. The defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016 before the High Court Division impugning the order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 rejecting the application for rejection of plaint. Upon hearing the parties on contest, by the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017, the rule was made absolute and the plaint was rejected holding that, the plaintiff claims the suit land by purchase from Porikkhit Banik by Registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit had instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 in the 5th Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Chattogram for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and perpetual injunction and got decree, but on appeal in Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996 the decree was reversed against which Porikkhit Banik filed Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 in the High Court Division but later on he withdrew the Civil Revision on 11-5-2010 without any permission to sue afresh and as such the suit stands precluded under Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure.

9. Impugning the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017 passed in Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016, rejecting the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, the plaintiff filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 3902 of 2018 and obtained leave which giving rise to this appeal.

10. Mr. Probir Neogi, the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants submits that the High Court Division was wrong in making the Rule absolute relying on additional documents other than the plaint itself inasmuch as it is a settled principle that while disposing of an application under Order VII, rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the statements and averments made in the plaint only and nothing beyond the plaint are to be considered and relied upon.

11. He further submits that the decree in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 in favour of the predecessor of the defendant respondents No. 1 and 2 having been obtained against Sree Kali Shankar and his two brothers for specific performance of contract, and the present plaintiff-petitioner/his predecessor was neither a party to the said suit nor having not claimed the suit property through those judgment debtors, the said decree cannot operate as resjudicata against the present plaintiff-appellant.

12. He further submits that the decree obtained by the predecessor of defendant-respondent No. 1 and 2 in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 being a decree passed in a suit for specific performance of contract, and the present suit being one for declaration of title and other reliefs, the decree in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 cannot operate as resjudicata inasmuch as it is settled in a long line of decisions including CQ MH Md Ayub Ali vs Bangladesh, 47 DLR (AD) 71 that the decree in a suit for specific performance of contract only decides the controversy between the vendor and the vendee as to the genuineness of contract and its enforceability, and such decree is not one deciding title to the suit property.

13. He further submits that the High Court Division was wrong in rejecting the plaint inasmuch as it is settled in many cases including Abdur Rahman and others vs Kheru Malitha and others, 50 DLR (AD) 71: 5 BLT (AD) 217 that the withdrawal of suit by necessary implication blots out the effect of the judgment and decrees prior to withdrawal, and as such by withdrawal of Title Suit No. 91 of 1995 by Porikkhit, the vendor of the plaintiff-appellant, both the judgments and decree of the trial Court and appellate Court were blotted out, and the present suit by the plaintiff-appellant on new causes of action is not barred.

14. Next he submits that the High Court Division was wrong in making the Rule absolute and rejecting the plaint inasmuch as the application filed by the defendants for rejection of plaint was on the ground of the suit being barred by resjudicata, and it is an elementary principle of law settled by a long line of decisions including Mahbubul Hague vs Md A. Kader Munshi, 52 DLR (AD) 49 and Sreemoti Pushpa Rani Das vs AkM Habibur Rhaman and others 1993 BLD (AD) 217 that the question of resjudicata being a mixed question of law and fact can only be resolved by taking evidence, and as such the plaint cannot be rejected on the defendants' plea of resjudicata.

15. On the other hand Mr. Subrata Chowdhury, the learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. M Qumrul Hoque Siddique, the learned Advocate for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submits that admittedly the plaintiff purchased the suit land from Prokshit Banik, the sole heir of the tenants recorded in concerned RS Khatians by registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997, during pendency of Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 in the High Court Division and as such his Kobala was hit by Lis Pendens under section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

16. He further submits that the Rule issued in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 was made absolute by judgment dated 16-5-2010, which was affirmed in Civil Petition No. 81 of 2011 by judgment dated 12-6-2014 and Civil Review petition No. 97 of 2014 by judgment dated 6-4-2016 and thereby Sudhir Chandra Banik acquired title based on the decree for specific performance of contract for sale executed by the heirs of the tenants recorded in the RS Khatians and the present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar deposed as DW 2 in the said suit No. 41 of 1991.

17. He further submits that the appellant, knowing fully well that, father of Porikkhit i.e. Kashi Mohon and his brother Ananta Mohon had sold their land to Mohendra Lal Dey by registered Kobala deed dated 29-8-1934 and Porikkhit did not inherit any land, but still he created the collusive purchase deed dated 24-8-1997 with malafide intention to frustrate the decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992.

18. Next he submits that the present appeal, originating from the decree of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, is merely a collusive and fraudulent attempt to frustrate the judgment and decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992, affirmed by this Division in Civil Review Petition No. 97 of 2014.

19. Mr. M. Qumrul Haque Siddique, the learned Advocate for the respondents in support of his contention has placed reliance in the decision of Abdul Jalil and others vs Islamic Bank Bangladesh Lid 53 DLR (AD) 12, Shahjahan Siraj vs Md Rafique Quoraishi and others 2 ALR (AD) 202 and so on.

20. We have heard the learned Advocates of both sides at length and perused the relevant laws and decisions together with the papers/documents contained in the paper book.

21. For better understanding let us first discuss the relevant provisions of laws on the issue.

22. Firstly, Order VII, rule 11 of the Code enjoins:

"Rule 11-Rejection of plaint-The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:-
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the requisite stamp paper within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;"
23. With regards to the question of withdrawal of a suit Order XXIII, rule 1 of the Code is reproduced below:

"1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.
(1) At any time after the institution of a suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of his claim.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied,
(a) That a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or
(b) That there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of a suit or part of a claim,
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such part of the claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of the claim.
(3) Where the plaintiff withdraws from a suit or part of a claim, without the permission referred to in sub-rule (2), he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall be preclude from instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to withdraw without the consent of the others."
24. Besides, section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act enjoins:

"52. During the pendency in any Court in Bangladesh, of any suit or proceeding which is not collusive and in which any right to immoveable property is directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or order which may be made therein, except under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it may impose."
25. In the Case of Sumon Paul vs Binode Kumar Mali 5 LM (AD) 2018 139 his Lordship Mr. Muhammad Imman Ali, J observed:

"The High Court Division observed that it is true 'that a plaint of a suit should not be rejected under order 7 rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure only on point of res-judicata. But the facts of the present case are quite different. Apparently it shows that the predecessor of the plaintiffs-opposite parties lost their title up to Appellate Division and after settling dispute finally by the Appellate Division the present plaintiff-opposite parties purchased some lands in 2009 from the predecessor of the defendants of the former suit and they instituted present suit for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and for further declaration that the decree passed in previous Title Suit No. 235 of 1972 against the predecessor of the present plaintiffs are void and not binding upon them. The issue of present title suit was decided by the Court finally in previously instituted suit and that issue cannot be agitated in the subsequently suit.

The High Court Division concluded that the present plaintiffs-opposite parties having knowledge about the previous suit and having lost their title up to this Division, instituted the present suit which is nothing but a futile exercise.

Having considered the facts and circumstances discussed above, we are of the view that the High Court Division has properly considered the relevant law and facts involved in the case."
26. The same point has also been established in the case of Shahjahan Siraj vs Md Rafique Quoraishi and others reported in 2 ALR (AD) 202:

"What is important to note here is that the learned Additional District Judge rejected the plaints of both the suits as according to him those were barred under section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure. This is not the correct exposition of law. The plea of res judicata is to be decided after framing an issue to that effect. There is no scope for application of section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure for rejection of plaint.

Having gone through the plaints of both the suits, we are of the view that the plaints of both the suits were rightly rejected by the learned Additional District Judge but that should have been done by resorting to the provision of section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Therefore, the plaints of both the suits shall be deemed to have been rejected under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure as the materials on record justify to do so. We are of the view that the ultimate decision made by learned Additional District Judge and the learned Single Judge are based on proper appreciation of materials on record."
27. In the decision of Abdul Jalil and others vs Islamic Bank Bangladesh Ltd. 53 DLR (AD) 12 it has been held:

"It is well settled now that a plaint may be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure merely on a plain reading of the plaint but in exceptional circumstances the Court may invoke its inherent jurisdiction and can throw the plaint out in limini. It is also well settled that the plea of implied bar should be decided on evidence unless the fact disclosed in the plaint clearly indicate that the suit is not maintainable. In exceptional cases recourse may be taken even under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It is also well settled that in an application for rejection of plaint on the ground of undisclosed cause of action the Court should not dissect the plaintiffs case part by part. "
28. In the land mark decision of Chowmuhani College vs Md Ismail Hossain 26 DLR 10 it has also been observed on the question of maintainability with reference to Order VII, rule 11 of the Code as under:

"to my mind the intention of the legislature in making the provision under Order 7, rule 11 of the Code is very clear and if the same be considered properly with reference to given facts in a case much time of the Court may be saved, parties may be relieved of unnecessary wastage of energy and harassment and they may be directed towards getting proper remedy without having the connected pleasure of prolonged litigation. In this case I have already held that the suit as framed is not maintainable and the said view of mine is supported by the decisions of our Supreme Court as cited above. So it is better that the parties in the instant suit should be relieved of unnecessary harassment."
29. The provision of Order VII, rule 11 of the code mainly enjoins that if on a mere reading of the plaint it is found that the suit is not maintainable the Court has to decide the said point outright. It is also held that Order VII, rule 11 is not exhaustive and the High Court Division in the instant case in exercise of his jurisdiction under section 150 read with 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure can reject the paint. Reliance can be placed in the decisions of Burmah Eastern Ltd., vs Burmah Eastern Employees Union and others 18 DLR 709 wherein it has been observed:

"Coming back to the fact of this case, I would like to say that, on a perusal of the plaint, there can be no doubt that the suit is incompetent. The plaint should be rejected out-right even if it is held that the ground for its rejection is not fully covered by express language of Order VII, rule 11, of the Code of Civil Procedure. What useful purpose would be served by allowing the defendant to file a written statement and, thereafter, to dismiss the suit after raising a contested Issue to the effect that the suit is incompetent, when the plaint itself discloses a suit which is not countenanced by law? If the suit is prohibited and its incompetency is evident from a mere reading of the plaint, it (plaint) should be rejected. Under clause (d) of rule 11 of Order VII, the Court is required to reject a plaint where the suit appears, from the statements in the plaint, to be barred by any law. In the present case although the suit may not be expressly barred by section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, the contention is that is la barred under law having regard to the requirement of the said section, namely, section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. If as a result of the provisions of law, the suit is barred, it would be barred under law, although, strictly speaking, it may not be specifically barred by law in express terms. The Court should, in such a case, reject the plaint under its inherent power."
30. In Burmah Eastern case as referred to above it was further held that "a still born baby should be buried at once" a proverbial legal proposition governing this field.

31. Now if we go back at the beginning of the litigations we would see that Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 of the present suit being Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 instituted Other Suit No. 45 of 1990 against recorded tenants of the holding, which on successive transfer was lastly renumbered as Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 and was decreed. The said decree was reversed in Other Appeal No. 521 of 1992 but the decree was restored in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 and affirmed by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 81 of 2011 and Civil Review petition No. 97 of 2014. The decree has been put into execution in other Execution Case No. 1 of 2014.

32. Admittedly, the plaintiff-appellant claimed to have purchased the suit land from Porkkhit Banik, the predecessor in interest of the defendant Nos. 10 to 12 of the present suit by a sale deed being No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit Banik prior to sale of the suit land to the plaintiff of the present suit instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 for determination of title and confirmation of possession, which on transfer was re-numbered as Other Suit No. 91 of 1995 and was decreed. Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996, which was allowed and the decree was reversed. Porikkhit Banik preferred Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 against the said appellate decree but anticipating defeat on 11-5-2010 he withdrew the said Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999. While allowing the withdrawal, the High Court Division set-aside the judgment and decree of the Appellate Court as well as the Trial Court. The contents of the application for withdrawal was to the effect that on perusal of the record the plaintiff appellant have understood that they should not have filed the suit now on proper understating of overall situation have decided not to proceed with the suit. The transferor of the present plaintiff did not seek any permission to release the suit due to any formal defect or any other reasons, rather it has been mentioned in clearest terms that they should not have filed the suit and decided not to proceed with the same.

33. Now it is to be considered in the absence of any leave from the Court whether a fresh suit can be instituted by the same person against transferee claiming title in the suit since no permission was taken for instituting a fresh suit.

34. It appears that Porikkhit Banik who filed the earlier suit transferred the suit land in favour of the present plaintiff who after purchase again filed the suit seeking declaration of title, permanent injunction and other identical reliefs being made in the earlier suit. It is clear that the vendor of the plaintiff filed suit No. 41 of 1992. Since vendor of the present plaintiff withdrew Revisional application as well as his suit, the present plaintiff is not entitled to file the instant suit.

35. The High Court Division clearly observed that the plaintiff claimed the suit land by purchase from Porikkhit Banik by Registered Kabala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit instituted Other suit No. 98 of 1992 in the 5th Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Chattogram for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and perpetual injunction and got decree, but on appeal on Other appeal No. 153 of 1996 the decree was reversed against which Porkshit Banik filed Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 in the High Court Division but later on he withdrew the civil Revision on 11-5-2010 without any permission to sue afresh and as such the suit stands precluded under Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure.

36. Since, no permission is accorded for instituting fresh suit, the present suit filed by the transferee of the previous plaintiff is not maintainable.

37. It is fairly established here that the parties indulged in various litigations in different Courts in respect of the suit property and all the proceedings, the present respondents got verdict in his favour. The present appellant is not claiming title otherwise from Porikkhit Banik whose predecessor lost up to the Appellate Division and after loosing in the appeal, Porikkhit Banik himself has withdrawn the revisional application.

38. It is evident that the present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar as plaintiff filed other suit No. 450 of 2014 against the defendant No. 1 and 2 for declaration of three things as mentioned above who deposed as DW 2 in other Suit No. 41 of 1992 but knowing everything regarding the suit and its fate up to the Appellate Division he instituted the present suit suppressing all the past events.

39. In that suit defendant No. 1 and 2 filed an application under Order VII, rule 11(d) of the code of Civil Procedure for rejection of plaint. The learned Joint District Judge by order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 rejected the application for rejection of plaint on the ground that resjudicata is a mixed question of facts and law, which can only be decided after adducing evidence at the time of pre-emptory hearing. Against which the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Civil Revision before the High Court Division and the High Court Division upon hearing the parties made the Rule absolute and rejected the plaint of tide suit No. 450 of 2014.

40. Notably, in the suit being No. 41 of 1992 the present appellant deposed as DW 2 that means the plaintiff appellant knew everything regarding the suit and its fate up to the Appellate Division.

41. As we have already mentioned that Porikkhit Banik from whom the plaintiff appellant purchased the suit land vide deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997 filed title suit No. 98 of 1992 which was decreed but on appeal it was reversed against which he filed Civil Revision before the High Court Division, but fearing the fate of the Civil Revision he withdrew the Civil Revision case, therefore, the bar of the provisions of Order XXIII, rule 1(3) would operate, wherein it has been stated that the plaintiff will be precluded from placing any fresh suit if permission is not taken. The purchase of the suit land by the appellant plaintiff from Porikkhit is absolutely a sham transaction being hit by the provision of Lis Pendens enjoins under section 52 of the transfer of property Act as mentioned above.

42. Therefore, if the provisions of Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code read with section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act be considered in juxtaposition with facts and circumstances of the instant case, our view is that it squarely attracts Order VII, rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure and hence High Court Division did not commit any error in the decision by rejecting the plaint in revisional jurisdiction under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

43. Further, the case in hand is indeed of such an impact which as we have discussed above manifestly maintained that the rejection of plaint by the High Court Division was absolutely justified and hence cannot be gainsaid that there is a denial of justice in any manner.

44. The High Court Division has rightly rejected the plaint of Title Suit No. 450 of 2014 pending in the Court of Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Chattogram. The judgment and order passed by the High Court Division is elaborate, speaking and well composed. We are not inclined to interfere with the same.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed Without any order as to costs.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 164=== ===20 ADC (AD) 161===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Appeal No. 65 of 2015

Decided On: 15.01.2023

Milon and Ors.
... Vs. ...
The State

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., M. Enayetur Rahim and Jahangir Hossain, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Jahangir Kabir, Advocate instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Sayem Mohammad Murad, Assistant Attorney General instructed by Madhumalati Chy. Barua, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 342; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 364; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 374; Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 103(2); Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 25, Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 26, Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 30

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.01.2012 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 2185 of 2006 along with Death Reference No. 43 of 2006 with Jail Appeal Nos. 407, 408, 409, 410, 411 and 412 of 2006

Result:
In Favour of State

JUDGMENT
M. Enayetur Rahim, J.

1. This appeal, under Article 103(2)(b) of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is directed against the judgment and order dated 05.01.2012 and 08.01.2012 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 2185 of 2006 heard along with Death Reference No. 43 of 2006 and Jail Appeal Nos. 407, 408, 409, 410, 411 and 412 of 2006 dismissing the Criminal Appeal in part thereby affirmed the judgment and order dated 18.05.2006 passed by the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No. 2, Bogura so far relates to present-appellants, who were convicted under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 and sentenced each of them to death by hanging until death and also to pay a fine of Taka 1,00,000/-, each.

2. The relevant facts for disposal of the present appeal are as follows:

The present appellants along with 04 others were put on trial before the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal No. 2, Bogura in Nari-O-Shishu Case No. 228 of 2004 and charge was framed against them under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000.

3. The appellants and other accused pleaded not guilty to the charges brought against them and claimed to be treated.

4. The prosecution case, in a nutshell, are that on the night following 13.08.2000 victim Shahnaj Akhter Banu alias Sumi daughter of Abdus Satter (P.W-1) was in asleep in her father's dwelling hut. At about 11:00 p.m. the accused persons called her out of the house on a pretext to get meet with her paramour Alam. Later on she was raped and killed. Subsequently, the dead body was found by Rofiqul floating in the pond and it was brought to the courtyard of the informant. The body bore multiple injuries having marks of sexual violence. On 14.04.2000 the incident was informed to the father of the victim who was then Station Master at Adomdighi gate No. 4, over telephone by Md. Belayet Hossain alias Nantu (P.W-6). He, then rushed to his home and heard the occurrence from his wife Rowshan Ara Begum (P.W-2) to the effect that. Since 11.00 p.m. victim Sumi was found missing; Sumon son of domestic worker Md. Ashraful (P.W-7), neighbour Rafiqul, and Delower (P.W-4) unsuccessfully searched her and on the following morning her dead body was found inside the pond by Rafiqul.

5. The prosecution was launched by lodging a first information report by Abdus Sattar (P.W-1) as informant which was recorded as Adamdighi Police Station case No. 9 dated 14.08.2000 corresponding to G.R. No. 90 of 2000.

6. The police after conducting investigation submitted charge sheet against 06(six) persons including the present appellants under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000.

7. At the trial the prosecution in all examined 13 (thirteen) witnesses to prove the case. The defence cross examined the said witnesses but did not adduce any defense witness.

8. On conclusion of the trial the learned judge of the Tribunal found the present appellants guilty along with 4(four) others under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 and sentenced each of them to hang till death and also fine of taka 1,00,000/-.

9. In view of the provision of section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the learned Judge of the Tribunal made reference to the High Court Division for confirmation of the death sentence. The said reference was registered as Death Reference No. 43 of 2006. All the convicts had preferred Criminal Appeal No. 2185 of 2006 and present appellants also filed Jail Appeal Nos. 407 of 2006 and 409 of 2006 respectively. The other convicts also preferred separate Jail Appeals.

10. A Division Bench of the High Court Division heard the said Death Reference along with the above Criminal Appeal and Jail Appeals and by the impugned judgment and order dated 05.01.2012 and 08.11.2012 accepted the reference in part and maintained the sentence of death of the present appellants and acquitted the other convicts from the charges brought against them.

11. Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal No. 2185 of 2006 was allowed-in-part and Jail Appeal No. 407 of 2006 and 409 of 2006 were dismissed.

12. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order the present appellants have prepared this appeal.

13. Mr. Md. Jahangir Kabir, learned Advocate appearing for the appellants having referred to the impugned judgment, evidence and other materials on record submits that the prosecution has failed to examine any independent and disinterested witnesses to support its case and thus, the trial court as well as the High Court Division committed serious error in relaying the evidence of the said partisan witnesses.

14. He further submits that no one saw the occurrence and the alleged confessional statement made by appellant-Milon cannot be said to be true and voluntary one. Moreover, at the time of the examination under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure he categorically stated that the said confession was the outcome of torture and coercion; but the High Court Division failed to consider this aspect and maintained the conviction and sentence relaying on the said confessional statement which is not true and voluntary.

15. Mr. Kabir further submits that the trial Court and the High Court Division erred in law in relying on the alleged extra judicial confession made by appellant-Rabiul alias Habul, though such extra judicial confession has got no evidentiary value.

16. On the other hand, Mr. Sayem Mohammad Murad, learned Assistant Attorney General submits that the trial Court and the High Court Division on proper consideration of the evidence and materials on record rightly and legally found the present appellants guilty under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 and there is no illegal or infirmity in the impugned judgment and as such there is no scope to interfere with the same.

17. We have heard the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the impugned judgment as well as the evidence and other materials on record.

18. It is true that in the instant case there is no eye witness of the alleged occurrence.

19. The appellant-Milon made a statement under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the Magistrate (exhibit-4) which runs as follows:

“আমি আপনার জিজ্ঞাসাবাদে জানাচ্ছি যে, গত ১৩-৮-২০০০ তারিখে দিবাগত রাতে রবিউল পিতা-হাবু, হেলাল পিতা-আলেফ, আসলাম পিতা-নজরুল ওরফে নজু, যুসাদ্দেক পিতা-মনসের, মান্নান পিতা-সামাদ এবং আমি রাত অনুমান ১১-০০ টার দিকে আমাদের প্রাননাথপুর গ্রামের সাত্তারের বাড়ির খোলানে যাই। হেলাল ও রবিউল সাত্তারের মেয়ে শাহনাজ যে ঘরে থাকে সেই ঘরের জানালায় দিয়ে টোকা মারে এবং শাহনাজকে বলে তার প্রেমিক আলম এসেছে। শাহনাজ তার ঘর থেকে বের হয় এবং মই দিয়ে বাড়ির প্রাচীরের উপরে উঠে এবং আসলাম শাহনাজকে হাত দিয়ে ধরে প্রাচীরের বাইরে নামায় । আমাদের সঙ্গে অল্প কিছু দূরে অনুমান ২০/২৫ হাত যাওয়ার পরে শাহনাজ আলমের কথা জিজ্ঞেস করে । আলম পুকুর পাড়ে বলে হেলাল জানায় । আসলাম কাপড় দিয়ে শাহনাজের মুখ চেপে ধরে এবং হেলাল শাহনাজকে পাজাকোলা করে শাহনাজ ওরফে সুমির পিতার বাড়ির পূর্ব দিকে অবস্থিত মান্নানের পিতার বনপাতির জমিতে নিয়ে যায়। আমি নিকটবর্তাঁ পুকুরের পাড়ে বসে পাহাড়ায় ছিলাম যাতে অন্য লোকজন টের না পায়। প্রথমে হেলাল, তারপর আসলাম, তারপর মুসাদ্দেক, তারপর রবিউল, তারপর মান্নান এবং সর্বশেষ আমি শাহনাজকে হাত পা জোর করে রেখে এবং মুখে কাপড় চেপে ধরে ধর্ষণ করা হয়। ধর্ষণের পরে আসলাম ও হেলাল শাহনাজের ওড়না দিয়ে ওখানেই শাহনাজের গলায় ফাস লাগায় গলায় পেঁচিয়ে ৷ মারার সময় মান্নান শাহনাজের পা ও রবিউল হাত ধরে ছিল। মুসাদ্দেক আমাকে এই ঘটনা প্রকাশ করতে নিষেধ করে । হেলাল আমাকে বলে যে এই ঘটনা ফাস করলে তোকে মারব। হেলাল, আসলাম ও রবিউল এই তিন জন শাহনাজের লাশ সাত্তারের পুকুরের পূর্ব পাড়ে নিয়ে আসে হাত দিয়ে তুলে ধরে। শাহনাজের লাশ তারা পুকুরের পূর্ব পাড়ে রাখে পানিতে, মাথাটির কিছু অংশ পানির উপরে পুকুরের পাড়ে মাটিতে ছিল। আমরা সবাই চলে গেলাম। আমি বাড়িতে গেলাম। পরদিন বিকেলে আমি বিরামপুরে যাই ।”

20. P.W-11, Md. Alamin, Magistrate, 1st Class recorded said confessional statement of appellant-Milon. P.W.-11 in his deposition categorically and consistently stated that he recorded the said statement after complying all the legal requirements as laid down under section 364 and 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. He proved said confessional statement of appellant-Milon, as exhibits-4 and his 10 signatures thereon, as exhibits-4/1-4/10. He also proved the thump impression of appellant-Milon thereon.

21. P.W-11 was duly cross-examined by the defense but nothing could be elicited to shake his credibility in any manner whatsoever. Moreover, at the time of recording the statement under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure appellant-Milon did not say anything to the recoding magistrate about the alleged torture on him by the police before recording the said statement. Further, it emerges from the record that the appellant-Milon was arrested on 02.09.2000 and on the very same day he was produced before the Magistrate, P.W-11 and his confessional statement was recorded on the same day.

22. As such, the appellant-Milon's plea at the time of examination under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that his confessional statement was not true and voluntary and he was compelled to make such statement before the Magistrate is not at all tenable.

23. We have also scrutinized Exhibit 4 as well as the evidence of PW 11. The Magistrate after recording the confessional statement of appellant-Milon certified (স্মারক মন্তব্য) to the effect:

“আমি আসামী মিলনকে বুঝিয়ে দিয়েছি যে, তিনি দোষ স্বীকার করতে বাধ্য নন এবং যদি তিনি তা করেন তাহলে তা তার বিরুদ্ধে সাক্ষ্য হিসেবে ব্যবহৃত হতে পারে । আমি বিশ্বাস করি যে, এই দোষ স্বীকারোক্তি স্বেচ্ছা মূলকভাবে করা হয়েছে। তিনি তা নির্ভুল বলে স্বীকার করেছেন এবং তিনি তা বিবৃতি দিয়েছে, তাতে তার পূর্ণাঙ্গ ও সত্য বিবরণ রয়েছে ।”
24. Column 8 of the form has been filed by the PW 11 in following manner:

“যেহেতু আসামীকে বিকেল ৪ টা থেকে সন্ধ্যা দেয়া হয় এবং এই ফর্মের ৬ নং ক্রমিকে উল্লিখিত প্রশ্নগুলো করার পরও আসামী দোষ স্বীকারোক্তিমূলক জবানবন্দি প্রদান করেছেন । কাজেই আমি মনে করি যে, আসামী স্বেচ্ছায় এই দোষ স্বীকারোক্তিমূলক জবানবন্দি প্রদান করেছেন । আসামীর শরীরে কোনও প্রকার জখম ও আঘাতের চিহ দেখা যায়নি”
25. In view of the above, we have no doubt about the truth and voluntariness of the confessional statement (exhibit-4) of appellant-Milon.

26. It is now well settled principle of law that judicial confession if it is found to be true and voluntary can form the sole basis of conviction as against the maker of the same. [Reference: Islamuddin (Md) alias Din Islam Vs. The State, 13 BLC(AD) page-81, Hazrat Ali and others Vs. The State 44 DLR(AD), page-51].

27. In view of the above proposition, we have no hesitation to concur with the findings of the High Court Division as well as the trial Court that the confessional statement (exhibit-4) made by appellant-Milon is true and voluntarily and relying on the same conviction can be awarded safely.

28. In the case of State Vs. Abdul Kader alias Mobail Kader, 67 DLR (AD), 6, this Division has held that retraction of a confession has no bearing whatsoever if it was voluntarily made so far the maker is concerned.

29. At the time of examination under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the plea of appellant-Milon that the alleged confessional statement made by him is outcome of torture by the police has got no legal basis, rather in our opinion said plea is afterthought and brain child of the learned Advocate for the defence.

30. Moreover, immediate after the occurrence convict-Milon fled away from the village and he was arrested from another place. Form this circumstances we may also draw inference about his involvement in the Commission of offence.

31. In the instant case it is the prosecution case that victim-Shahnaj Akter Banu @ Shumi was killed after she had been being raped by the accused persons.

32. P.W-12 Dr. Nehar Ranjan Mozumder, held autopsy upon the cadaver of victim-Shahnaj Akter Banu. She proved the post mortem report and his signature thereon, exibits-5 and 5/1 respectively.

33. P.W-12 found the following injuries;

One continuous, transverse ligature mark present below the thyroid cartilage, breadth 1/2"
One bruise on the tip of nose, size "3/4 X 1/2".
One bruise on the back of left elbow joint, size 1" X 1/2".
Multiple bruises on the upper and medial aspect of both thighs of various sizes.
Multiple seratch abrasions on the upper and medial aspect of both thighs and genitalia of various sizes.
Extensive bruise in the labia majora and minora of both side and vaginal canal.
On detailed dissection extravasations of clotted blood found present at the side of the injuries. The skin, soft tissue, muscles, trachea were found highly congested. Hyod bone both cornu was found fractured. Uterus empty. Stomach contains semi digested food. All the visceras were found highly congested. High vaginal swab was taken for pathological examination and sent to the department of pathology. S.Z.M.C. Bogra, as per memo. No. SZMC/PM/2000/265, dated 16.08.2000. Doctor opined that death was due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation by ligature following forceful sexual act on her which was ante mortem and homicidal in nature.

34. The above autopsy report manifests that the victim-Shahnaj was killed after she being raped. Thus, the prosecution has been successfully able to prove that manner of occurrence that the victim was murdered after she being raped.

35. P.Ws-3, 5, 6 and 7 in their respective depositions categorically stated that on the morning of 13.08.2000 Rafiqul found the dead body in the pond and thereafter her dead body was taken to the house of the informant. The witnesses found marks of violence on the body of victim. The said witnesses further deposed that Rabiul's father nabbed Rabiul and in presence of the village peoples said Rabiul disclosed that he along with the other accused committed the alleged occurrence.

36. P.W-7 Md. Ashraful in his deposition stated that when Rabiul made the said statement it was recorded by them in a tape recorder cassette and the said cassette was produced before the Tribunal and marked as material exhibit-VI.

37. In cross-examination, PW 3 Md Yar Ali asserted to the effect;

“রবিউলের স্বীকারোক্তির সময় আমি, বাদী সাত্তার সহ অন্যান্য লোক ছিল। আসামী রবিউল স্ব-ইচ্ছায় স্বীকারোক্তিমূলক জবানবন্দি দিয়েছে । রবিউলের দেওয়া জবানবন্দি আর লিখি নাই। তাহার জবানবন্দি ক্যাসেটবন্দী করা হয় ।”

38. PW 5 Md Ayub Hossain in his cross-examination also asserted to the effect;

“রবিউল ওরফে হবুলকে তাহার বাবা ধরিয়া আনে এই কথা পুলিশের নিকট বলিয়াছি। হবুলের বক্তব্য ক্যাসেট করার কথা পুলিশের নিকট সাক্ষ্য কালে বলিয়াছি।”
39. PW 6 Md Belayet Hossain alias Nantu also asserted his communication-in-chief in cross-examination to the effect:

“আমার সামনে হবুলের কথা রেকর্ড করা হয়। সেই সময় আমি উপস্থিত ছিলাম । এই সেই রেকর্ডিং ক্যাসেট যোহা শোনা হয়) এই ক্যাসেটটিতে যে কথা শোনা গেল তাহা আসামী হবুলের কণ্ঠ । এই ক্যাসেট (ফিতা) বন্ধু প্রদর্শনী-৬] (যাহাতে আসামী হবুলের কণ্ঠ রেকর্ড করা আছে ।)”
40. PW 7 Md Ashraful in his cross-examination also stated to the effect:

“হবুলের পিতা তাকে ধরিয়ে দেয়। হবুল ধরাপরার পর সে সকলের সামনে স্বীকারোক্তি দেয় যে, দে সহ অন্যরা সুমিকে ধর্ষণ করে খুন করেছে । হবুলের সেই স্বীকারোক্তি ক্যাসেট করা হয়। তখন আমি উপস্থিত ছিলাম ।”

41. The above evidence of the witnesses are very consistent and corroborative in nature and the defence has failed to shake their credibility of the said witness of the said witnesses. As such, it is proved beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution that the father of the Habul alias Rabiul nabbed his son and in presence of the villagers Rabiul made extra judicial confession as to his involvement along with the other accused in commission of the offence. If we consider this aspect along with the confessional statement, exhibit-4 made by the appellant-Milon, then we have no hesitation to hold that the appellant-Milon and Rabiul were involved with the commission of the alleged offence of rape and murder.

42. Mr. Jahngir Kabir, learned Advocate appearing for the appellant submits that the alleged extra judicial confession made by the Rabiul alias Habul in presence of the villagers has got no evidentiary value and the trial court as well as the High Court Division have committed serious error in relying on such statement in finding the guilty of appellant Habul alias Rabiul.

43. In the case of Nausher Ali Sarder and others vs. The State, 39 DLR (AD), 194, this Division has observed that since the accused made extrajudicial confession to the witnesses before arrival of the 'Dafadar' this confessional statement is voluntary and true as it agrees with the established facts of the case.

44. In the said judgment (paragraph-8) this Division observers:

"Mr. Serajul Huq has tried to bring this confessional statement within the mischief of sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act which make any confession to, or in custody of, a police officer inadmissible. After Nausher was caught and detained in the shop of Toyeb Ali, local Dafadar (P.W. 13) appeared and also questioned him about the reason of his being present and caught there. Mr. Serajul Huq contends that this statement was made in presence of and during custody of a police officer, which expression includes a Chowkidar/Dafadar. This attempt by the learned Counsel is found to be an exercise in futility, for the evidence of Toyeb Ali and Akram Ali, read with evidence of Dafadar Hasen Ali, clearly shows, that the statement was made, first of all, to Toyeb Ali and Akram Ali before the arrival of the Dafadar. If any further statement had been made when the Dafadar arrived, the earlier statement would not be affected as it was made not in presence of, or while the accused was in custody of, the police. This confessional statement is voluntary and true as it agrees with the established facts of the case."

45. In this particular case, P.Ws-3, 5, 6 and 7 in their respective dispositions and cross-examinations categorically stated that in presence of the village peoples Rabiul alias Habul confessed his guilt in commission of the alleged offence. Further, statement of Rabiul was recorded in tape recorder cassette, material exhibit-VI. Defence did not put any suggestion to the said witnesses to the effect that at the time of making such statement by Rabiul, police personnel were also present.

46. If we consider the evidence of said P.Ws coupled with the proposition of law as enunciated in the case of Nausher Ali Sarder and others vs. The State, then we are of the opinion that the extra judicial confession made by appellant-Rabiul has got evidentiary value and we can safely rely on the same in awarding conviction of its maker.

47. In the case of State Vs. Abdul Kader @ Mobile Kader, 67 DLR(AD)6 this Division in interpreting section 30 of the Evidence Act has held that when more than one person are being tried jointly for the same offence and a confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other of such persons as well as against the person who makes such confession.

48. In this particular case confession of convict-Milon lends support to the extrajudicial confession of convict-Rabiul.

49. Having considered and discussed as above, we are of the view that in maintaining of conviction of the present appellants under section 9(3) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 the High Court Division did not commit any error and illegality and as such there is no scope to set aside the order of conviction.

50. However, having considered the proposition of law settled in the case of Nalu Vs. The State, reported in 17 BLC(AD), 204 in regard to award sentence coupled with the attending facts and circumstances of the present case, in particular, at the time of the alleged occurrence the appellants were just attended in majority, and that Milon in his confession stated that he did not take part in murdering the victim rather other two accused namely Aslam and Helan, who were acquitted by the High Court Division and the State did not prefer any appeal against such acquittal, killed the victim by pressing her neck, and that the appellants are in death cell for about 17 years and during that period the appellants have suffered great mental agony, and that the father of Rabiul having nabbed him handed over to the villagers on coming to know about his involvement with the commission of the offence, we are of the view that justice would be best served if the sentence of death is commuted to one imprisonment for life.

51. Accordingly, the sentence of both the appellants is commuted from death to one imprisonment for life with a fine of Tk. 1,00,000 (one lac) each, in default to suffer imprisonment for 5(five) years more. The Jail Authority is directed to shift the appellants from death cell to normal cell.

52. Accordingly, with the above modification of sentence, the appeal is dismissed.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 161===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 210 of 2019

Decided On: 08.01.2023

Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Md. Abdul Jalil and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Md. Abu Zafor Siddique, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Zahangir Alam, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Md. Moinul Islam, Advocate instructed by Mohammad Ali Azam, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 115(1); Limitation Act, 1908 - Section 5

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.04.2017 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Rule No. 84(CON)/2015

Result:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Md. Abu Zafor Siddique, J.

1. Delay of 12 days in filing the civil petition for leave to appeal is hereby condoned.

2. This civil petition for leave to appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 10-4-2017 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Rule No. 84(CON)/2015) thereby making the Civil Rule discharged.

3. Facts of the case, in brief, are that the respondents as plaintiffs, instituted Other Class Suit No. 92 of 2007 in the Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Sadar, Netrokona which on transfer was renumbered as Other Class Suit No. 120 of 2010 against the petitioners as defendants for mandatory injunction stating, inter alia, that one Abdul Motaleb and others instituted the Title Suit No. 5 of 1983 in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Netrokona, for declaration of the title of the suit property along with declaration that the RoR in the name of the Government is wrong and erroneous and ultimately got decree. Against which the Government preferred Other Class Appeal No. 100 of 1985, which was dismissed on contest Present respondent No. 3, Siraj Ali, one of the plaintiffs, on 5-6-1995 sold 1.32 acres land to plaintiff No. 1, Abdul Jalil. On 31-8-1996 Abdul Motaleb sold 12 1/2 decimals land to plaintiff No. 3 by registered deed, Suruz Ali sold 40 decimals land to plaintiff No. 1 on 18-7-2001 and on 20-2-2003 one Abdul Kadir sold 1.60 acres land to plaintiff Nos. 1 and 2 by registered deed and on 27-5-2003 Jamal Uddin sold his land to plaintiff No. 1. In this way, plaintiff No. 1 possessed 3.84 1/2 acres scheduled land and went to pay rent but the defendants refused to accept the same on the plea mat a case is pending in the High Court Division regarding the claim of the land and, as such, the plaintiffs instituted the instant suit.

4. Defendant Nos. 1-4 filed written statements denying all the material allegations made in the plaint contending, inter alia, that the suit is not maintainable as framed; there is no cause of action in the suit; the plaintiffs have no title, possession in the suit land and the suit is barred by limitation. They stated that the land was correctly recorded in the name of Government khas khatian in 1962 as bill category, and one Abdul Motaleb did not take any step to get the record amended and rather he filed Other Class Suit No. 53 of 1983 in the Court of Sub-ordinate Judge and illegally and fancy fully got decree of the suit Local people have been using the water of the suit property from long time and the plaintiffs filed this suit on false statement with intent to grab the Government properties and, as such, the suit is liable to be dismissed.

5. After hearing the parties and considering the materials on record, the Assistant Judge, Netrokona, by the judgment and decree dated 31-1-2011 dismissed the suit Being aggrieved, the plaintiffs preferred Other Appeal No. 99 of 2011 before the District Judge, Netrokona, which was heard by the Additional District Judge, Netrokona, who by his judgment and decree dated 18-6-2013 allowed the appeal, setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial Court.

6. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the aforesaid judgment and decree of the appellate Court, the defendants as petitioners moved the High Court Division under section 115(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure causing a delay of 403 days and obtained Rule on delay, which upon hearing the parties was discharged. Hence, the defendants are now before us having filed the instant civil petition for leave to appeal for redress.

7. Mr. Md. Zahangir Alam, learned Deputy Attorney-General appeared on behalf of the leave-petitioners submitted that the defendant-petitioners being the Government machinery it had to move different offices for necessary opinion and directions for filing a revisional application/appeal before the appropriate Court, and for such reasons delay in filing the revisional application has been caused which is bona fide and unintentional but the High Court Division without considering this aspect discharged the Rule by the judgment which is liable to be and, as such,. He submitted that the land in question had been recorded in the khas khatian in 1962 as bill category and the water of the bill is being used by local people in general and the plaintiffs filed the suit only to grab the Government khas land and the trial Court rightly dismissed the suit but the appellate Court reversed the same without considering the case of the defendants Government which is not maintainable in law, and, as such, the High Court Division without considering the merit of the case discharged the Rule without condoning the delay. He submitted that even in the absence of any application for condonation of delay, the Court has the inherent power to condone the delay in an appropriate case for proper administration of justice and, as such, he prays for the sake of justice in condoning the delay by setting aside the judgment and order impugned in this civil petition.

8. Mr. Md. Moinul Islam, learned Advocate appeared on behalf of the respondents made submissions in support of the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court Division.

9. We have considered the submissions of the learned Deputy Attorney-General for the leave-petitioners and the learned Advocate for the respondents, perused the impugned judgment and order along with other connected papers on record.

10. It appears that the scheduled land of the suit was recorded in khas khatian in the name of the Government in 1962. The present respondents instituted Other Class Suit No. 92 of 2007 in the Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Sadar, Netrokona for mandatory injunction on the suit land as described in schedules 1 and 2 of the plaint. Subsequently, the suit was transferred to the Assistant Judge, Khaliajuri, Netrokona and renumbered as Other Class Suit No. 120 of 2010. Present leave petitioners as defendant Nos. 1 to 4 filed written statements denying all the material allegations made in the plaint contending, inter alia, that the suit land has been recorded in khas khatian No. 1 since 1962. Subsequently, SA and RoR records were prepared in the name of the Government as bill category and, as such, the local people are using the water from the said bill for cultivating crops in the adjacent lands. However, the defendants prayed for dismissal of the suit.

11. After hearing the parties and on perusal of the materials on record, the learned Assistant Judge, Khaliajuri, Netrokona, by the judgment and decree dated 31-1-2011 dismissed the suit. Thereafter, the plaintiffs (respondents herein) preferred Other Class Appeal No. 99 of 2011 before the learned District Judge, Netrokona, which was ultimately heard and allowed by the learned Additional District Judge, Netrokona, by the judgment and decree dated 18-6-2013 upon reversing the judgment and decree so passed by the learned Assistant Judge and thereby decreeing the suit.

12. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree of the appellate Court, the leave petitioners moved to the High Court Division under section 115(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure but in filing the same, there had been a delay of 403 days and, as such, an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act was filed along with the said revisional application.

13. It appears from the application under section 5 of the Limitation Act that on the day of passing the judgment and decree on 18-6-2013 the defendant petitioners applied for certified copies of the judgment and thereafter, they were notified for requisite on 21-8-2013. The defendant petitioners obtained the same on 22-8-2013.

14. Thereafter, the Additional Deputy Commissioner (Revenue), Netrokona, transmitted the file to the office of the Solicitor on 29-8-2013 and the learned Solicitor, after following the necessary formalities, sent the same to the office of the learned Attorney-General on 25-9-2013. Thereafter, an Assistant Attorney-General was entrusted with the file for drafting, who after exhausting the necessary formalities and preparing the draft, sworn in the affidavit on 30-11-2014 and, as such, in the meantime, delay of 403 days had occurred.

15. But the High Court Division upon hearing the learned Advocate dismissed the Rule without considering the explanation offered by the defendant petitioners in the application under section 5 of the Limitation Act and thereby, the High Court Division erred in law in not appreciating the cause for making the delay. Hence, the civil petition for leave to appeal has been filed for redress.

16. The facts and circumstances clearly indicate that the different offices of the Government are so connected that one cannot work without co-operation and assistance from the other. In the instant case, it appears mat the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Netrokona, initiated the proposal to file a revisional application before the High Court Division but it could not do so without obtaining the necessary papers and the opinion of the Government pleader and concerned authority.

17. However, it appears that the record was sent to the office of the Solicitor and thereafter, the record was sent to the office of the learned Attorney-General and then an Assistant Attorney-General was entrusted to take all necessary steps regarding filing of the same in the High Court Division under section 115(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure. In these circumstances, the reasons for delay of 403 days in filing the revisional application as stated in the application under section 5 of the Limitation Act by the defendant-petitioners cannot be disregarded and discarded simply because the individual would always be quick in taking the decision whether he would pursue the application for condonation of delay since he is a person legally injured. Whereas, the state being impersonal machinery has to work through different offices or servants and from one table to another table in different offices.

18. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case it appears that the delay caused in filing the revisional application was due to the exhaustion of the official formalities and, as such, the same is beyond the control of the defendant petitioners and moreover, the aforesaid delay of 403 days is not an inordinate one and, as such, if the same is not condoned the defendant leave petitioners shall be led to irreparable loss and injury.

19. Having gone through the application under section 5 of the Limitation Act, it appears that the petitioners have properly explained the reasons for which they could not prefer the instant revisional application before the High Court Division in time. And as such, we are of the view that there is no latches or negligence on the part of the petitioners and they have been able to explain the cause of delay in filing revisional application which in our view, fulfills the requirement as spelled out under section 5 of the Limitation Act upto the satisfaction of the Court and, as such, we are inclined to condone the delay.

20. In such view of the matter, the High Court Division erred in not condoning the delay and, as such, the impugned judgment is liable to be and, as such, disposing of the civil petition for leave to appeal.

21. Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division is set-aside. The delay of 403 days in filing the revisional application before the High Court Division is condoned. The High Court Division is directed to hear the substantive revisional application under section 115(1) of the Code as In Re motion in accordance with law.

With the aforesaid directions, this civil petition for leave to appeal is disposed of. However, there will be no order as to costs.

"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===



===75 DLR (AD) 147===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeals Nos. 21-24 of 2011

Decided On: 01.09.2022

Bangladesh
... Vs. ...
Md. Abdul Alim and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin, M. Enayetur Rahim and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: A.M. Amin Uddin, Attorney General and Abanti Nurul, Assistant Attorney General instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Probir Neogi, Senior Advocate, Anita Ghazi Rahman and Suvra Chowdhury, Advocates instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 118(4), Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 119, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 120, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 126

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal in Appeals No. 134, 139, 143 and 144 of 2009

Result:
Appeal Allowed

JUDGMENT
Obaidul Hassan, J.

1. All these Civil Appeals are being disposed of by this common judgment as all of those involve common questions of law and facts as well as all appeals have arisen out of a common judgment.

2. These Civil Appeals by leave granting order dated 12.12.2010 by this Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeals No. 1302-1305 of 2010 at the instance of the appellant has been directed against the judgment and order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in Administrative Appellate Tribunal Appeals No. 134, 139, 143 and 144 of 2009 allowing the appeals reversing the judgment and order dated 23.03.2009 passed by the Administrative Tribunal No. 1, Dhaka in Administrative Tribunal Case Nos. 166 of 2007 and 22 of 2008, disallowing the case.

3. The facts leading to the filing of these Civil Appeals in short are that, there was a public advertisement for recruitment of Upazilla/Thana Election Officer in the scale of Tk. 4300-7740/- published in the Daily Ittefaq on 23.09.2003, in response to which the respondents having the requisite qualifications aspiring to get appointment applied for the post. Later on being successful to pass in both the written and viva voce examinations 328 candidates including the respondents finally selected for appointment with a direction to join the said posts by 7th September, 2005. Applicants in serial Nos. 8,16,26,39,40,68 and 69 to the Administrative Tribunal Case No. 166 of 2007 joined on 29.12.2005 and 06.12.2006 while the rest of all joined on 07.09.2005. On being posted at different Upazillas/Thanas as Election Officers the respondents joined the respective posting places as per direction of the Election Commission and all of them had been discharging their duties with sincerity and honesty. According to the notification being No election commissioner/pra-1/1-0;/Tha:/Ni:-5/2005 533 dated 4th September, 2005 it was stipulated that the respondents would be on probation for two years subject to extension or curtailment by the authority. It was further stipulated that the probation officer would be provided with four months Foundation Training in BPATC or any other institution and the government may provide further training before or after the Foundation Training. In addition to Foundation Training the respondents would be given other training for professional skill and special skill as Election Officer. Due to rush of work for holding election in early 2006, the respondents were not given Foundation Training to impart basic understanding of working in a government office. The respondents, however, given two courses of training each of having three days duration, one on preparation of voter lists and the other on core training courses and on completion of training they were awarded Certificate of Achievement. The respondents had been discharging their duties to the satisfaction of the authority. There was neither any complaint nor any allegation that they were not doing their job properly. For their satisfactory performance many of the respondents were given the enhanced assignment of District Election Officer. The applicants No. 7 and 39 were given additional charge of District Election Officer, Bandarban and Nilphamari respectively. There was serious political agitation against the functioning of Election Commission under the then Chief Election Commissioner, Mr. Justice Aziz. The parliamentary election was scheduled for 22nd January, 2007 which was abandoned later. When State emergency was declared a new Caretaker Government took up the power and the Election Commission was thoroughly reconstituted. There was rampant allegation in the media that many Election Officers appointed in September, 2005 were selected with the grace of the leader of Jote-Sarker. The applicants had no political affiliation rather were selected on the basis of competitive examination held by the Bangladesh Public Service Commission. The reconstituted Election Commission being obliged to work objectively and independently above any political affiliation, took a noble initiative to weed out the appointees got appointment through political affiliation. But instead of verifying the political background of Upazilla/Thana Election Officers through members of intelligent service of the Government, the Election Commission committed wrong in entrusting the Institute of Business Administration (IBA), University of Dhaka to determine the fitness of the Election Officer. The test held by the IBA is neither authorized by law nor had the institute any such skill or resource to verify the political background of the Election Officers. Despite the said reason the applicants were notified to attend at a fitness test by the IBA and the allocation of marks was 20% on general knowledge; 10% on general math; 30% on language and 40% on election Rules and Regulations. The aforesaid allocation of marks had nothing to do with the performance of the applicants as probationary Election Officers. The test on the MCQ (Multiple Choice Questions) method was held on 18th May, 2007. The question paper was in English and the time allotted was only two hours. For most of the applicants the method was unknown and incomprehensible. However, all the applicants had excellent performance on election related laws, but they could not do well on language and communications. The said test had no real basis nor had any nexus with the political background of the applicants. Moreover, the IBA had neither access to Annual Confidential Reports (ACR) of the applicants nor had any scope to consult the superior officers of the applicants for their field works. Although the applicants came out successful in the fitness insofar as it relates to election laws and regulations, the Election Commission by its notification dated 03.09.2007 terminated the applicants-respondents from their service on false allegations that their performance during probation period was not satisfactory.

4. Being aggrieved the respondents served a notice of Demand for Justice to the Election Commission on 06.09.2007 and thereafter the order being passed by order of the President and having no appellate authority against the impugned order the petitioners-respondents filed the above applications before the Administrative Tribunal No. 1, Dhaka.

5. The opposite parties-appellants contested both the cases by filing separate written statements contending inter alia that the test of competency is confidential and the test of competency of the respondents was rightly tested on English Language, General Mathematics, Election Laws and Regulations. The respondents having failed in the competency test to meet the requirement for confirmation during two years' probation period. The Election Commission was legally authorized to test the competency of the respondents in the manner it prescribed.

6. Upon hearing all the parties both the cases were dismissed by the judgment and order dated 23.03.2009. Being aggrieved with judgment and order dated 23.03.2009 the petitioners-appellants-respondents preferred Appeals No. 134 of 2009, 139 of 2009, 143 of 2009 and 144 of 2009 before the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka. On conclusion of hearing both sides the Administrative Appellate Tribunal allowed the appeals setting aside the termination order of the respondents from service and also directed to reinstate them in their service with arrear salary and other benefits by the impugned judgment and order dated 12.04.2010.

7. Feeling aggrieved with the judgment and order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in Administrative Appellate Tribunal Appeals No. 134, 139, 143 and 144 of 2009 the appellant filed the Civil Petition for Leave to Appeals No. 1302-1305 of 2010 before this Division. After hearing the parties this Division was pleased to grant leave by order dated 12.12.2010 and hence these Civil Appeals.

8. Leave was granted to consider two points such as:

Whether the Administrative Appellate Tribunal was justified in not holding that all the Upazila Election Officers including the respondents having participated in the test conducted by the Institute of Business Administration, Dhaka University without any objection or protest and the respondents being unsuccessful in the test;
Whether the Administrative Appellate Tribunal was justified in not holding that the respondents have joined in their service on 7th September, 2009 and there being a provision empowering the Election Commission terminating service of those employees if they are found lacking in efficiency and their service having been terminated on 3rd September, 2007 i.e. before completion of 2 (two) years, the Election Commission committed no illegality in terminating service of the Respondents;
Whether the Administrative Appellate Tribunal was justified in not holding the efficiency, neutrality and impartiality of the Election Officers being necessary for holding a democratic and impartial election and allegations having been made against the respondents that they have allegiance to a certain political party and no denial having been made to the said allegations.
9. Mr. A.M. Amin Uddin, the learned Attorney General took the lead while producing his submissions on behalf of the appellant. Mr. Sk. Mohd. Murshid, the learned Additional Attorney General and Mr. Mehedi Hassan Chowdhury, the learned Additional Attorney General adopted the submissions produced by the learned Attorney General. The submissions on behalf of the learned Counsels for the appellant are shortly stated in the following. The learned Counsels on behalf of the appellant assailing the impugned judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal submitted that the Administrative Appellate Tribunal committed illegality in not holding that the termination order of the respondents was termination simpliciter not stigmatic. To established their submissions they relied on several decisions of the Indian Supreme Court in Mathew P. Thomas Vs. Kerala State Civil Supply Corporation Ltd. (2003) 3 SCC 263; Progressive Education Society Vs. Rajendra (2008) 3 SCC 310; Chaitanya Prakash Vs. H. Omkarappa (2010) 2 SCC 623 and also a decision of this Division in the Federation of Pakistan Vs. Mrs. A.V. Issacs 9 DLR (1957) SC 16.

10. Per contra, Mr. Probir Neogi, the learned senior Advocate, Mr. Obaidur Rahman Mostafa, the learned Advocate, Mr. Qumrul Haque Siddique, the learned senior Advocate, Mr. Salahuddin Dolan, the learned senior Advocate and Mr. A.F. Hassan Ariff, the learned senior Advocate made their submissions on behalf of the respective respondents. All the learned aforesaid Counsels for the respondents except Mr. obaidur Rahman Mostafa at one echo vehemently contended that the respondents had been terminated during the probation period maliciously and their termination order was not termination simpliciter rather stigmatic or punitive and as such said termination order was illegal and liable to be set aside. Supporting the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal the learned Counsel for the respondents next contended that the Administrative Appellate Tribunal was correct to set aside the said termination order. In support of their submissions the learned Counsels for the respondents put reliance on a decision of the Indian Supreme Court in the case of Ajit Singh Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1983 SC 494. The discussion of the said decision will be made at the later part of this judgment.

11. We have considered the submissions of the learned advocates for the both sides, perused the judgment and order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in Appeals No. 134, 139, 143 and 144 of 2009 and the judgment and order dated 23.03.2009 passed by the Administrative Tribunal No. 1, Dhaka in Administrative Tribunal Case Nos. 166 of 2007 and 22 of 2008 and the materials on record.

12. It is on the record that an advertisement for the appointment in the post of Upazila/Thana Election Officers under the Election Commission Secretariat was published by Bangladesh Public Service Commission (shortly, BPSC) asking applications from the qualified candidates having either 1st class Masters degree or 1st class Masters degree along with 2nd class Honours degree. After holding both written and viva voce examinations as many as 328 candidates including the respondents were finally selected for the appointment in the said posts advertised for, by the BPSC. Accordingly the Election Commission appointed them by Gazette Notification dated 4th September, 2005 and subsequently upon their joining to the aforesaid posts their joining letters were accepted by the Election Commission through Gazette Notification dated 8th September, 2005. The respondents were appointed in the posts under certain terms and conditions. The relevant portion of their appointment notification is extracted below:

“(ক) নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের আদেশক্রমে তাহাকে লোক প্রশাসন প্রশিক্ষণ কেন্দ্রে অথবা অন্য কোন প্রশিক্ষণ প্রতিষ্ঠানে সরকার/কর্তৃপক্ষ কর্তৃক নির্ধারিত বিষয়ের উপর অন্যুন ৪ মাসের বুনিয়াদি প্রশিক্ষণ গ্রহণ করিতে হইবে; প্রয়োজেনবোধে সরকার/কর্তৃপক্ষ এই প্রশিক্ষণের সময়কাল বাড়াইতে বা কমাইতে পারিবেন; অথবা প্রয়োজনবোধে সরকার/কর্তৃপক্ষ বুনিয়াদি প্রশিক্ষণের পূর্বে বা পরে তাহাকে অন্য যে কোন প্রশিক্ষণের জন্য মনোনীত করিতে পারিবে ।

(খ) বুনিয়াদি প্রশিক্ষণ ছাড়াও কর্তৃপক্ষের অভিপ্রায় অনুযায়ী তাহাকে পেশাগত ও বিশেষ ধরণের প্রশিক্ষণ গ্রহণ করিতে হইবে।

(গ) তাহাকে ২ (দুই) বৎসর শিক্ষানবিস হিসাবে কাজ করিতে হইবে । শিক্ষানবিশ কালে যদি তিনি চাকুরী বহাল থাকিবার অনুপযোগী বলিয়া বিবেচিত হন, তবে কোন কারণ দর্শানো ছাড়াই এবং পাবলিক সার্ভিস কমিশনের পরামর্শ ব্যতিরেকে তাঁহাকে চাকুরী হইতে অপসারণ করা যাইবে ।

(ঘ) উপরের (ক) ও (খ) উপ-অনুচ্ছেদে উল্লিখিত প্রশিক্ষণ সাফল্যের সহিত সমাপনান্তে এবং যদি শিক্ষানবিসকাল সন্তোষজনকভাবে অতিক্রান্ত হয়, তাহা হইলে তাহাকে চাকুরীতে স্থায়ী করা হইবে।
...

(ঝ) এই প্রজ্ঞাপনে সুনির্দিষ্টভাবে বর্ণিত হয় নাই, এইরূপ ক্ষেত্রে তাহার চাকুরী সংক্রান্ত বিষয়ে সরকারের প্রচলিত বিধি-আদেশ এবং নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়/সরকার/কর্তৃপক্ষ কর্তৃক ভবিষ্যতে প্রণীতব্য বিধি ও বিধান দ্বারা তাহার চাকুরী নিয়ন্ত্রিত হইবে ।”
13. From the above it emanates that the respondents were appointed in the aforesaid posts with condition of undergoing probation period for two years and their appointment will be permanent on satisfactory completion of their probation period. It transpires from the record that during the probation period all the appointees including the respondents had been asked by the Election Commission Secretariat to sit for the suitability test held by the Institute of Business Administration, University of Dhaka. The test was held opting for MCQ method and the total marks of the test was allocated in the following way:

"General Knowledge (20%); General Math (10%); Language and Communication (30%) and Election Rules and Regulations (40%)."
14. All the appointees sat for the said test and all of them except the respondents became successful in the test. Thereafter, the Election Commission Secretariat terminated the appointment of the respondents with effect from 6th September 2007. The pertinent portion of the said notification is as follows:

“নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের অধীনস্থ মাঠ পর্যায়ে উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন অফিসার পদে কর্মরত নিম্নবর্ণিত কর্মকর্তাগণের শিক্ষানবিসকালে কর্ম সম্পাদন সন্তোষজনক না হওয়ায় নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের ২০ ভাদ্র ১৪১২ বাং/৪ সেপ্টেম্বর তারিখের নিকস/প্র-১/১-উ/থা:নি:অ:-৫/২০০৫/৫৩৩ নং প্রজ্ঞাপনের ১(গ) নং অনুচ্ছেদে বর্ণিত শর্তানুসারে তাহাদের চাকুরীতে বহাল রাখিবার অনুপযোগী বিবেচনা পূর্বক ৬-৯-২০০৭ তারিখ হইতে তাহাদের সরকারী চাকুরীর অবসান করা হইল।”
15. In view of the factual matrix of the instant case it is manifested that the respondents had been terminated from their service during the probation period. The main point of controversy between the appellants and the respondents is whether the Election Commission Secretariat committed illegality terminating the service of the respondents during the probation period.

16. The respondents being appointed in September, 2005 the provisions of the Election Commission (Officers and Staff) Rules, 1979 (in short, the Rules 1979) including its amendment made on 25th May 2005 is applicable regarding their appointment. The provision as to the period of probation of the respondents in their service as stated in the appointment notification shall be construed in conjunction with Rule 11 of the Rules 1979. In fact, the conditions of probation period stated in paragraph (Ga) of the appointment notification dated 4th September 2005 emanates its force from Rule 11 of the Rules 1979. For better understanding Rule 11 of the Rules 1979 is extracted below:

"11. Probation-(1) Persons selected for appointment to a specified post, otherwise than by transfer on deputation, against a substantive vacancy shall be on probation-
(a) in the case of direct recruitment, for a period of two years from the date of substantive appointment; and
(b) in the case of promotion, for a period of one year from the date of such appointment:
Provided that the appointing authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing extend the period of probation by a period or periods so that the extended period does not exceed two years in the aggregate.

(2) Soon after the completion of the period of probation, including the extended period, if any, the appointing authority-
(a) if it is satisfied that the conduct and the work of the probationer during his period of probation has been satisfactory, shall confirm him; and
(b) if it is of opinion that the conduct and the work of the probationer during that period was not satisfactory, may-
(i) in the case of direct recruitment, terminate his service; and
(ii) in the case of promotion, revert him to the post from which he was promoted."
17. Thus, from the above provisions of law it is amply clear that persons selected for appointment to a specified post shall be on probation for a period of two years from the date of substantive appointment or for extended period not exceeding two years in the aggregate. Regarding the purpose of probation it has been observed very succinctly in the case of Khazia Mohammed Muzammil vs. The State of Karnataka and Ors. reported in (2010) 8 SCC 155 at paragraph No. 12 that-

"The purpose of any probation is to ensure that before the employee attains the status of confirmed regular employee, he should satisfactorily perform his duties and functions to enable the authorities to pass appropriate orders. In other words, the scheme of probation is to judge the ability, suitability and performance of an officer under probation."
18. From the above discussion it can easily be understood the object and purpose underlying the concept of probationary period. Admittedly during the probation period the respondents including the other employees numbering 328 in total had been required to sit for a suitability test held by the IBA, University of Dhaka and the respondents agreeing with the decision appeared in the examination but finally they became unsuccessful. However, all other employees succeeded in the examination. In the said backdrop the authority terminated the appointment of the respondents inasmuch as they could not pass in the suitability test during the period of probation.

19. From the bare reading of the termination notification as stated earlier it is evident that the respondents had been terminated from the service due to their dissatisfactory performance in the service during the probation period. But it is argued by the respondents that the said order was not termination simpliciter rather it was punitive for which the said termination order of the respondents was illegal. Mr. Salahuddin Dolon, the learned Counsel for the respondents contended that the respondents had been terminated during the probation period due to their appointment was made during the regime of another political government and as such the termination was not simpliciter rather punitive. To establish his submission he relied on the decision made in Ajit Singh vs. State of Punjab AIR 1983 SC 494 wherein it was held that if the government servants are terminated arbitrarily and not on the ground of unsuitability, unsatisfactory conduct or the like, the said termination is illegal.

20. At this juncture let us examine whether the termination of the Respondents from service was simpliciter or punitive. It is to be noted that the law as to the probation of an employee in our country is almost identical to that of India. The decisions of Indian Supreme Court are more categorical in this area and deals with the issue eloquently touching its every facet. More importantly, we may refer to the case of Chaitanya Prakash Vs. H. Omkarappa (2010) reported in 2 SCC 623 where it has been held by the Indian Supreme Court as under:

"It is no longer res integra that even if an order of termination refers to unsatisfactory service of the person concerned, the same cannot be said to be stigmatic. In this connection, we make a reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in Abhijit Gupta Vs. S.N.B. National Centre, Basic Sciences (2006) 4 SCC 469 wherein also a similar letter was issued to the employee concerned intimating him that his performance was unsatisfactory and, therefore, he is not suitable for confirmation. We have considered the ratio in light of the facts of the said case and we are of the considered opinion that the basic facts of the said case are almost similar to the one in hand. There also, letters were issued to the concerned employee to improve his performance in the areas of his duties and that despite such communications the service was found to be unsatisfactory. In the result, a letter was issued to him pointing out that his service was found to be unsatisfactory and that he was not suitable for confirmation, and, therefore, his probation period was not extended and his service was terminated, which was challenged on the ground that the same was stigmatic for alleged misconduct. The Supreme Court negatived the said contention and upheld the order of termination.

In Mathew P. Thomas v. Kerala State Civil Supply Corporation Ltd. (2003) 3 SCC 263 also the concerned employee was kept on probation for a period of two years. During the course of his employment he was also informed that despite being told to improve his performance time and again there is no such improvement. His shortfalls were brought to his notice and consequently by order dated 16.01.1997 his services were terminated, wherein also a reference was made to his unsatisfactory service. In the said decision, the Supreme Court has held that on the basis of long line of decisions it appears that whether an order of termination is simpliciter or punitive has ultimately to be decided having due regard to the facts and circumstances of each case.

In Pavanendra Narayan Verma v. Sanjay Gandhi PGI of Medical Sciences (2002) 1 SCC 520 this Court had the occasion to determine as to whether the impugned order therein was a letter of termination of services simpliciter or stigmatic termination. After considering various earlier decisions of this Court in paragraph 21 of the aforesaid decision it was observed by this Court as under:

"One of the judicially evolved tests to determine whether in substance an order of termination is punitive is to see whether prior to the termination there was (a) a full-scale formal enquiry (b) into allegations involving moral turpitude or misconduct which (c) culminated in a finding of guilt. If all three factors are present the termination has been held to be punitive irrespective of the form of the termination order. Conversely if any one of the three factors is missing, the termination has been upheld.

In Abhijit Gupta (Supra.), this Court considered as to what will be the real test to be applied in a situation where an employee is removed by an innocuous order of termination i.e. whether he is discharged as unsuitable or he is punished for his misconduct. In order to answer the said question, the Court relied and referred to the decision of this Court in Allahabad Bank Officers Assn. vs. Allahabad Bank (1996) 4 SCC 504 where it is stated thus:

"14............... As pointed out in this judgment, expressions like 'want of application', 'lack of potential' and 'found not dependable' when made in relation to the work of the employee would not be sufficient to attract the charge that they are stigmatic and intended to dismiss the employee from service."
21. Further it has been observed in the case of Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of U.P. (2000) reported in 5 SCC 152 (paragraph-27) that-

"The important principles which are deducible on the concept of 'motive' and 'foundation', concerning a probationer, are that a probationer has no right to hold the post and his services can be terminated at any time during or at the end of the period of probation on account of general unsuitability for the post in question. If for the determination of suitability of the probationer for the post in question or for his further retention in service or for confirmation, an inquiry is held and it is on the basis of that inquiry that a decision is taken to terminate his service, the order will not be punitive in nature. But, if there are allegations of misconduct and an inquiry is held to find out the truth of that misconduct and an order terminating the service is passed on the basis of that inquiry, the order would be punitive in nature as the inquiry was held not for assessing the general suitability of the employee for the post in question, but to find out the truth of allegations of misconduct against that employee. In this situation, the order would be founded on misconduct and it will not be a mere matter of 'motive'.

'Motive' is the moving power which impels action for a definite result, or to put it differently, 'motive' is that which incites or stimulates a person to do an act. An order terminating the services of an employee is an act done by the employer. What is that factor which impelled the employer to take this action? If it was the factor of general unsuitability of the employee for the post held by him, the action would be upheld in law. If, however, there were allegations of serious misconduct against the employee and a preliminary inquiry is held behind his back to ascertain the truth of those allegations and a termination order is passed thereafter, the order, having regard to other circumstances, would be founded on the allegations of misconduct which were found to be true in the preliminary inquiry."
22. Having examined the aforesaid decisions of the Indian Supreme Court it is squarely evident that the employer is legally authorized to assess the competency of an employee during the period of probation. Simultaneously, the employer is entitled to terminate the service of the employee during the probation period due to unsatisfactory performance. We are also of the view that whether a termination order is simpliciter or stigmatic will be ascertained based on the factual matrix of each case. On plain reading of the termination order of the respondents it appears that the same is ex-facie not stigmatic. It simply terminates the service of the respondents as their service was found not satisfactory.

23. In the case in hand the Election Commission terminated the service of the Respondents during the probation period as they did not come out successful in a test arranged by the IBA. The said test was held to ascertain the general suitability and competence of the Respondents to remain in their service. Such test cannot be termed as 'not befitting' to examine the suitability of the employee. The said test was held through MCQ method which is a universally accepted method for suitability test. The IBA under the University of Dhaka was assigned to arrange the test. Indisputably, the IBA under the University of Dhaka is one of the top-notch educational institutions in our country and it is widely recognized for its transparency, accountability and genuineness in respect of the examination system. More so, the question pattern of the test was in commensurate with the qualifications of the respondents having either Masters degree with 1st class or 2nd class Honours with Master degree.

24. The respondents could not bring any materials on record from which it could be manifested that there was allegation of misconduct against them and an inquiry was held behind their back in pursuant to which they had been terminated from service during the probation period. Therefore, we are of the view that the Election Commission Secretariat was in right stand to arrange for a suitability test during the probation period of the respondents and on being unsuccessful in the suitability test the respondents had been terminated from service which we hold to termination simpliciter not stigmatic.

25. Again, the respondents did not challenge the decision of the Election Commission Secretariat for holding suitability test rather they accepting the decision of the Election Commission Secretariat appeared in the said test and in the said way the respondents also admitted the decision of the Election Commission Secretariat for holding the suitability test and as such they are barred by the principle of estoppel. Due to the aforesaid reason the respondents are estopped from denying that the said suitability test was not proper method of their assessment. Had the aforesaid test been unsuitable for assessing their ability during the probation period they should not have participated in the test.

26. The learned Advocate on behalf of the respondents argued that according to Rule 11 of the Rules 1979 the authority is entitled to terminate the service of a probationer during the probation period if it is found that the conduct and work of him is not satisfactory. In that case it was incumbent upon the Election Commission to assess the performance of the respondents on the basis of their ACR, integrity, efficiency, good conduct, character, sense of value and temperamental suitability, departmental training etc. The Election Commission assigned the responsibility of taking examination to the IBA, who has neither access to ACR nor has any report regarding the integrity and performance of the respondents. But the entire assessment was done on the basis of the result of an examination which was taken beyond the conditions stipulated in the appointment notification. In this regard, our considered view is that holding examination for the appointees while undergoing probation period is not restricted in law to assess their suitability in service. Rather the assessment of a probationer is not confined only to good conduct and character, but also their competency for service.

27. During hearing the learned Counsels for the respondents further contended that the Election Commission Secretariat purportedly terminated the service of the respondents resorting to pick and choose policy. It transpires from the record that all the 328 candidates sat for the suitability test in which all but the respondents did not come out successful and the Election Commission Secretariat terminated the appointment of the respondents based on the result of the suitability test. Thus, we find no substance in the aforesaid claim of the learned Counsel for the respondents.

28. The learned Counsels for the respondents also contended that the Election Commission in its plenary meeting No. 294/2010 held on 11.05.2010 perused the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal and decided to implement the said judgment and order by reinstating the respondents in service cancelling the notification dated 03.09.2007. Pursuant to the said decision of the Election Commission, reinstatement of the respondents in the service was notified on 13.05.2010 and the same was published in the official Gazette notification on 25.05.2010. The Election Commission also by an official letter dated 22.06.2010 communicated its decision not to prefer appeal against the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal to the office of the Prime Minister. But the Cabinet Secretary bypassing all the aforesaid decisions filed these Civil Appeals interfering with the independent functioning of the Election Commission as enunciated in Article 118(4) of the Constitution.

29. To address the above issue we need to have a glance at the decision of the Election Commission which is extracted below:

“প্রশাসনিক আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনালের এ.এ.টি ১০৪/২০০৯, ১৩৯/২০০৯, ১৪৩/২০০৯ ও ১৪৪/২০০৯ নং (এ. টি, কেস নং-১৬৬/২০০৭ ও ২২/২০০৮ নং হতে উদ্ভূত), মামলার রায় কমিশন সভায় গভীরভাবে পর্যালোচনা করা হয়। আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনাল তার রায়ে যথাযথ কারণ যুক্তি উল্লেখপূর্বক এ.টি মামলা নং-১৬৬/২০০৭ ও ২২/২০০৮-তে ঘোষিত রায় বাতিল করেন। আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনালের রায়ের বিরুদ্ধে সুপ্রীম কোর্টের আপীল বিভাগে আপীল দায়ের করার মত শক্তিশালী উপাদান নেই। এমতাবস্থায় প্রশাসনিক আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনালের রায়ের আলোকে নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের ৩ সেপ্টেম্বর ২০০৭ তারিখের নিকস/উ: স: (এ-২)/২০০৭/সেপ্টেম্বর-নিয়োগ/১৩৯ সংখ্যক প্রজ্ঞাপন বাতিল পূর্বক অবসানকৃত ৮৫ জন উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন কর্মকর্তাকে পুনর্বহালের সিদ্ধান্ত নেয়া যায়। রায় অনুযায়ী ৮৫ জন উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন কর্মকর্তা (পরিশিষ্ট-'খ' অনুযায়ী) বেতন-ভাতাদিসহ অন্যান্য সুযোগ-সুবিধাদি প্রাপ্য হবেন। তাদের দ্রুত পদায়ন ও সংক্ষিপ্ত প্রশিক্ষণের প্রয়োজনীয় কার্যক্রম গ্রহণ করা যেতে পারে।

২.৪ সিদ্ধান্ত: বিস্তারিত আলোচনার পর কমিশন নিম্নরুপ সিদ্ধান্ত গ্রহণ করেন।
(ক) প্রশাসনিক আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনালের রায় পর্যালোচনায় সুপ্রীম কোর্টের আপীল বিভাগে আপীল করার মত প্রয়োজনীয় গ্রাউন্ড নেই।
(খ) রায়ের আলোকে নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের ৩ সেপ্টেম্বর, ২০০৭ তারিখের নিকস/ভি:স(প্র-২)/২০০৭ সেপ্টেম্বর-নিয়োগ/১৩৯ নং প্রজ্ঞাপন বাতিল পূর্বক ৮৫ জন উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন কর্মকর্তাকে দ্রুত পদায়ন ও সংক্ষিপ্ত প্রশিক্ষণের প্রয়োজনীয় কার্যক্রম গ্রহণ করতে হবে।
(গ) রায় অনুযায়ী ৮৫ জন উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন কর্মকর্তা (পরিশিষ্ট-“খ” অনুযায়ী) বকেয়া বেতন-ভাতাদিসহ অন্যান্য সুযোগ-সুবিধাদি প্রাপ্য হবেন।”
30. But on perusal of the record it reveals that subsequently the Election Commission decided to contest the present appeals. The decision of the Election Commission is stated below:

“উপজেলা/থানা নির্বাচন অফিসার পদে চাকুরি অবসানকৃত ৮৫ জন কর্মকর্তার মামলার বিষয়ে প্রতিদ্বন্দিতা না করার জন্য বিগত নির্বাচন কমিশনের ১১-৫-২০১০ তারিখের ২৯৪/২০১০তম কমিশন সভার সিদ্ধান্ত হয়। সেই সময়ের প্রেক্ষাপট আর বর্তমান প্রেক্ষাপট সম্পূর্ণ ভিন্ন বলে মাননীয় নির্বাচন কমিশনারগণ মনে করেন। বর্তমান প্রেক্ষাপটে উল্লিখিত মামলায় নির্বাচন কমিশনের পক্ষ হয়ে প্রতিদ্বন্দিতা করার সিদ্ধান্ত যৌক্তিক বলে মাননীয় নির্বাচন কমিশনারগণ মতামত ব্যক্ত করেন।”
31. From the above it is transparent that the Election Commission reverted from their earlier decision of not contesting appeal and now it is contesting the appeal pursuant to its own decision, thereby there is no question of interference with the functions of the Election Commission.

32. The learned Counsels on behalf of the respondents referring to the provisions of Articles 118(4), 120 of the Constitution of Bangladesh, Sections 3 and 5 of the Election Commission Secretariat Act, 2009 argued that the respondents being the employees of the Election Commission only the Election Commission has the exclusive control and authority over them and the Election Commission is empowered to take decision in respect of their reinstatement in service but the Cabinet Secretary being the part of Executive Organ of the Government had no locus standi to file the Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal leading to the present appeals against the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal. In this regard let us examine the provisions of law.

33. Article 118(4) of the Constitution enunciates that-

"The Election Commission shall be independent in the exercise of its functions and subject only to this Constitution and any other law"
34. Article 119 of the Constitution lays down the functions of the Election Commission which is as follows-

"119.(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of the electoral rolls for elections to the office of President and to Parliament and the conduct of such elections shall vest in the Election Commission which shall, in accordance with this Constitution and any other law-
(a) hold elections to the office of President;
(b) hold elections of members of Parliament;
(c) delimit the constituencies for the purpose of elections to Parliament; and
(d) prepare electoral rolls for the purpose of elections to the office of President and to Parliament."
(2) The Election Commission shall perform such functions, in addition to those specified in the foregoing clauses, as may be prescribed by this Constitution or by any other law."
35. Article 120 of the Constitution provides that-

"The President shall, when so requested by the Election Commission, make available to it such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this part."
36. Article 126 of the Constitution lays down that-

"It shall be the duty of all executive authorities to assist the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions."
37. From examination of the aforesaid provisions of the Constitution the cumulative effect is that the Election Commission is independent while exercising its power under Article 119 of the Constitution which does not include the power of appointment and terms and conditions of service of the employee under the Election Commission Secretariat. According to Article 119 during the election all Deputy Commissioners, Superintendents of Police and other concerned officials are placed under the control of the Election Commission for the purpose of holding election. Undoubtedly, none of the organs of the Government including the executive can interfere with the functions of the Election Commission. It is also apparent from the record that the Cabinet Secretary did not challenge the decision of the Election Commission rather he preferred the present Appeals against the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal involving the termination of the respondent from service. Thus, no question arises as to the interference with the functions of the Election Commission.

38. Now let us see what are the legal provisions regarding the appointment and service of the employees of the Election Commission. The Election Commission (Officers and Staff) Rules, 1979 were applicable to the respondents at the relevant period of their appointment.

39. Section 2(a) of Rules 1979 provides that--

"(a) "Appointing Authority" means such authority as has been specified in column 6 of Schedule IV;"
40. Section 8(1) of the Rules 1979 says that-

"appointment to a direct recruitment shall not be made except upon the recommendation of the Bangladesh Public Service Commission:"
41. Again, Section 3 of নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় আইন, ২০০৯ states that-

“৩। নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় ।__(১) নির্বাচন কমিশনের একটি নিজস্ব সচিবালয় থাকিবে এবং উহা নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় নামে অভিহিত হইবে।
(২) নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় সরকারের কোন মন্ত্রণালয়, বিভাগ বা দপ্তরের প্রশাসনিক আওতাধীন থাকিবে না।
(৩) নির্বাচন কমিশনের পক্ষে আইন প্রণয়ন সম্পর্কিত বিষয়াদি আইন, বিচার ও সংসদ বিষয়ক মন্ত্রণালয় কর্তৃক সম্পাদিত হইবে।
(৪) নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় বিধি দ্বারা নির্ধারিত পদ্ধতিতে নিযুক্ত একজন সচিব এবং অন্যান্য কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারীগণের সমন্বয়ে গঠিত হইবে ।”
42. Section 5 of নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয় আইন, 2009 provides that—

“৫ । নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের নিয়ন্ত্রণ ।__
(১) নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের সার্বিক নিয়ন্ত্রণ প্রধান নির্বাচন কমিশনারের উপর ন্যস্ত থাকিবে এবং সচিব নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের প্রশাসনিক প্রধান হইবেন।
(২) সচিব নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের প্রশাসন, শৃঙ্খলা বিধান এবং সচিবালয়ের উপর অর্পিত কার্যাদি যথাযথভাবে সম্পাদন করিবেন । তিনি এই আইন এবং তদধীন প্রণীত বিধিমালার অধীন বিধানাবলীর যথাযথ প্রতিপালন নিশ্চিত করিবেন এবং প্রধান নির্বাচন সময়ে অবহিত করিবেন।
(৩) প্রধান নির্বাচন কমিশনার নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের দায়িত্ব বিধি বা স্থায়ী আদেশ দ্বারা নির্ধারিত পদ্ধতিতে অন্য কোন কমিশনার কিংবা নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ের কোন কর্মকর্তাকে অর্পণ করিতে পারিবেন ।”
43. Rule 2 of নির্বাচন কমিশন (কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারী) নিয়োগ বিধিমালা, 2008 states that-

“(গ) নিয়োগকারী কর্তৃপক্ষ অর্থ সরকার বা সরকার কর্তৃক ক্ষমতাপ্রাপ্ত যে কোন কর্মকর্তা;”
44. Rule 11 of নির্বাচন কমিশন (কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারী) নিয়োগ বিধিমালা, ২০০৮--

“কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারীগণের চাকুরীর সাধারণ শর্তাবলী__
এই আইনের বিধানাবলী সাপেক্ষে, প্রজাতন্ত্রের অসামরিক পদে নিযুক্ত সরকারী কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারীগণের ক্ষেত্রে প্রযোজ্য চাকুরীর শর্তাবলী নির্বাচন কমিশন সচিবালয়ে নিযুক্ত সকল কর্মকর্তা ও কর্মচারীগণের ক্ষেত্রে প্রযোজ্য হইবে ।”
45. On scrutiny of the aforesaid provisions of law we arrive at a decision that the employees of the Election Commission Secretariat are appointed by the government and the terms and conditions of government employees are equally applicable in respect of the employees of the Election Commission. We find that both Sections 3 and 5 of talk about the independence of Election Commission Secretariat while Rules 2 and 11 of categorically states about the appointment of the employees and their terms and conditions in service. Virtually, Sections 3 and 5 of the do not put any embargo on the applicability of the contemporary government service laws to the employees of the Election Commission Secretariat. Therefore, we are constrained to hold that the Cabinet Secretary on behalf of the Government has locus standi to file the present Appeals against the judgment and order of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal since it involves the issue of termination of service of the employee of Election Commission Secretariat. Moreover, it is seen from the record that the Cabinet Secretary was a party to the Administrative Tribunal cases.

46. In view of the elaborate discussion and the observations made above, we find merit in the submissions of the learned Counsels for the Appellant and therefore the impugned judgment and order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka warrants interference.

47. Accordingly, all the appeals are allowed.

48. The judgment and order dated 12.04.2010 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in Appeals No. 134, 139, 143 and 144 of 2009 are hereby set aside.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 139===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 3013 and 3045 of 2019

Decided On: 02.01.2023

Government of Bangladesh and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Sk. Md Abdullah Faruque and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Md. Abu Zafor Siddique, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Abanti Nurul, Assistant Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 102, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 102(2)

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 29-4-2019 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos. 17372 and 16602 of 2017

Result:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Md. Abu Zafor Siddique, J.

1. Delay of 168 and 172 days in filing Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos. 3013 and 3045 of 2019 respectively are hereby condoned.

2. These civil petitions for leave to appeal are directed against the judgment and order dated 29-4-2019 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos. 17372 and 16602 of 2017 thereby making both the Rules Nisi absolute.

3. The subject matter and the point of law involved in both the civil petition are same and similar and, as such, they are heard together and disposed of by this single judgment.

4. Facts relevant for disposal of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 3013 of 2019 in short are as follows:

That present respondent Nos. 1 to 4 as writ petitioners filed Writ Petition No. 17372 of 2017 stating inter alia that they were appointed with required qualifications as Lecturers in Bir Shreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College at different times when the said College was non-government College; writ-petitioner No. 1, having qualification of BA (Hon's) and MSS (Social Science), joined as Lecturer on 25-11-1997 and since then has been serving as Lecturer of Economics in the said College; writ-petitioner No. 2, having educational qualifications of BA and MSS (Social Science), joined as Lecturer on 9-12-2002 and since then has been serving as Lecturer of Social Work; writ-petitioner No. 3, having educational qualifications of B.Com and M.Com, joined as Lecturer on 27-10-2002 and since then has been serving as Lecturer of Management; Writ-petitioner No. 4, having educational qualifications of BSS and MSS, joined as Lecturer on 10-6-2001 and since then has been serving as Lecturer of Political Science. It is stated by the writ-petitioners that two of the writ-petitioners have been enlisted as MPO teachers of the said College. Thereafter, because of good performance of the said College, the Government, vide Memo dated 21-5-2013, nationalized the said College and, accordingly, published gazette on 23-5-2013. Accordingly, the said College was renamed as Government Bir Sreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College. Thereafter, the Ministry of Public Administration created 40 posts of teachers and some post of non-teaching staffs ignoring the recommendation of the Education Ministry to create 65 posts in total. Upon such nationalization, the Ministry of Education subsequently, on 29-5-2014, published the names of the teachers who were appointed on ad-hoc basis as per Rules 3 and 5 of the “জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০”. However in the said list, the names of the writ-petitioners were not included. It is further stated that since, at the relevant time under the said “আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০”, the educational requirement for such absorption as Government teachers was the equivalent requirements applicable to the Government cadre posts, the writ-petitioners subsequently obtained such qualifications with prior approval from the College authority. Accordingly, a representation was made to the College authority for absorbing their service as Government teachers. Representation was made to the Director-General, Secondary and Higher Secondary Education as well for absorbing their services as Government teachers, but got no positive response. Under such circumstances writ petitioner respondent Nos. 1 to 4 have filed the writ petition and obtained the Rule Nisi.

5. Fact of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.3045 of 2019 in short are as follows:

That respondent Nos.1 to 6 as writ petitioners have filed Writ Petition No.16602 of 2017 stating inter alia that they were appointed as Lecturers of Charfasson College with required qualifications applicable at the time of appointment. Writ-petitioner No.1, having BA and MA in Islamic Studies, was appointed as a Lecturer in Secretarial Education on 20-11-2002 and he joined on 21-11-2002. Thereafter, he was appointed as Lecturer of Islamic Studies, and since then he has been serving in the said College as Lecturer of Islamic Studies. Writ-petitioner No.2, having educational qualifications of B.Com (Honors) and M.Com (Accounting), was appointed as Lecturer in Accounting on 9-6-2012 and, accordingly, he joined in the said post on 12-6-2012. Since then he has been serving in the said College as such. Writ-petitioner No.3 was appointed as Lecturer of Philosophy on 22-2-2000 and he joined in the said post on 1-3-2000. Since then he has been serving as Lecturer of the said College. Writ-petitioner No.4, having BA and MA (Social Science), was appointed as Lecturer of Social Welfare on 8-5-2004 and she joined in the said post on 9-5-2004. Since then she has been serving as Lecturer of the said College. Writ-petitioner No.5, having B.Com and M.Com (Management), was appointed as Lecturer of Management on 9-6-2012 and joined in the said post on 12-6-2012. Since then she has been serving as such in the said College. Writ-petitioner No.6, having B.Com and Masters of Business Studies (Management), was appointed as Lecturer of Management on 9-6-2012 and he joined in the said post on 12-6-2012. Since then he has been serving as Lecturer in the said College. It is stated that because of the good, performances of the writ-petitioners, they were enlisted as MPO teachers of the said College. Thereafter, because of good performance of the said College, the Government, vide Memo dated 22-10-2013, nationalized the said College and, accordingly, published gazette on 31-10-2013. Accordingly, the said College was renamed as Charfasson Government College. Thereafter. Upon such nationalization, the Ministry of Education subsequently, on 16-4-2015, published name of the teachers who were appointed on ad-hoc basis as per Rules 3 and 5 of the “জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০” and gazette notification was published on 14-5-2015 by dropping the names of the writ-petitioners in the said list. It is further stated that since, at the relevant time under the said “আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০”, the educational requirement for such absorption as Government teachers was the equivalent requirements applicable to the Government cadre posts, the writ-petitioners subsequently obtained such qualifications with prior approval from the Colleges authority., Accordingly, a representation was made to the College authority for absorbing their services as Government teachers. Representation was made to the Director General, Secondary and Higher Secondary Education as well for absorbing their services as Government teachers, but got no positive response. Under such circumstances writ petitioner respondent Nos. l to 6 have filed the writ petition and obtained the Rule Nisi.

6. The High Court Division took both the Rules Nisi together for hearing and ultimately, after hearing the parties and considering the materials on record, both the Rules Nisi were made absolute by the impugned judgment and order dated 29-4-2019. Hence, the writ-respondents are now before us having filed these two civil petitions for leave to appeal for redress.

7. Ms Abanti Nurul, learned Assistant Attorney-General appeared on behalf of the leave-petitioners in both the civil petitions for leave to appeal submits that the High Court Division erred in law in travelling beyond the scope of Rule Nisi in giving relief to the writ petitioner respondents under the absorption Rules, 2018 although no Rule Nisi was issued to that effect and, as such, the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. Moreover, she next submits that since the writ-petitioner respondents were appointed as Lecturer in Bir Sreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College, Sarsha, Jessore and Charfasson Government College, Bhola, when they were the non-government Colleges in 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004 and 2012 respectively. But the said Colleges were nationalized by the Government vide gazette notification dated 14-5-2013 and 22-10-2013 and subsequently, the Ministry of Education by circular dated 15-7-2013, 22-10-2013. 29-5-2014 and 16-4-2015 published the names of the Lecturers who were appointed on ad-hoc basis on different subject for the Bir Sreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College, Sarsha, Jessore and Charfassion College as per Rules 3 and 5 of the " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০ " and accordingly, Gazette Notification was published on 5-6-2014 and 14-5-2015 excluding the names of the writ petitioner respondents since at that point of time they had no requisite qualifications for becoming absorbed in the nationalized Colleges and, as such, the impugned judgment is liable to be set-aside. She further submitted that as per Rules 1 in Clause (2) of the “জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০১৮” that " এই বিধিমালা জারির তারিখ বা তৎপরবর্তীতে সরকারিকৃত কলেজের ক্ষেত্রে এই বিধিমালা প্রযোজ্য হইবে।” the writ-petitioner respondents cannot claim any benefits for absorption in the nationalized Colleges under that provision of Rules and, as such, the High Court Division, without applying judicial mind, passed the judgment and order dated 29-4-2019 in clear violation of the provision of law. She lastly submitted that at the time of nationalization and post creation, the writ-petitioner respondents had no requisite qualifications and, as such, they have no right to get any remedy in the writ petition and thus impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside on disposing of the civil petitions. However, she submits that since some of the writ petitioners are already enjoying the Government portion of monthly salary (MPO) and other benefits they will be continuing to get the same in accordance with law.

8. Mr Md Imam Hasan, learned Advocate appeared on behalf of respondent in both the civil petitions for leave to appeal made submissions in support of the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court Division. He submitted that although the writ-petitioners did not have the required qualification for being absorbed as Lecturers under the Nationalized Colleges as per the provision of the " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০ " but they subsequently obtained their educational qualifications and, as such, the writ-petitioners are entitled to have their service absorbed under the Nationalized Colleges in view of " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০১৮" by which the earlier Rules of 2000 has been repealed as evident from the saving clause of rule 15 sub-rule 2 Kha which provides that if any teacher or staffs of the concerned College was not absorbable under the bidhimala 2000 and if their services are absorbable under the Bidhimala, 2018 then they may be absorbed under the bidhimala 2018 considering which the High Court Division has rightly passed the impugned judgment and order in accordance with law and hence he submitted that these two civil petitions for leave to appeal are liable to be dismissed by affirming the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court Division.

9. We have considered the submissions of the learned Assistant Attorney-General for the leave-petitioners in both the civil petitions and the learned Advocate for the writ petitioner-respondents, perused the impugned judgment and order along with other connected papers on record.

10. It is not disputed that the writ-petitioners had lack of qualification for being absorbed as Lecturers under the aforesaid Nationalized Colleges as per the provision of " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০০০ ". The writ-petitioner respondents have stated in the additional paper book that subsequently they have upgraded their educational qualifications and, as such, they claimed that they are eligible to be absorbed as teachers in the Nationalized Colleges as per the provision of " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০১৮ ". In support of their claim, the learned Advocate for the writ-petitioner respondents referred to rule 15(2)(Kha) of aforesaid Absorption Bidhimala, 2018 basing on which the High Court Division has delivered the impugned judgment and order in favour of the writ petitioner-respondents and, as such, according to the learned Advocate for the writ petitioner respondents the High Court Division did riot commit any illegality in passing the impugned judgment and order.

11. In this respect, the learned Advocate for the leave-petitioners emphatically raised a question that the High Court Division has travelled beyond the scope/terms of the Rule Nisi in giving relief to the writ petitioner respondents by the impugned judgment and order which is liable to be set-aside in accordance with law.

12. To answer on this point, let us go through the prayers formulated in the writ petitions which read as follows:

"A Rule Nisi calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the refusal of the respondents in absorbing the service of the petitioners Lecturer of Government Bir Shreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College and Charfasson Government College, Bhola upon considering the required academic qualifications of the petitioners to be absorbed as Lecturer of Government College while Nationalization of the same should not be declared to have been done without lawful authority and is of no legal effect and also to show cause as to why the respondents should not be directed to absorb the service of the petitioners as the Lecturer of Government Bir Shreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College, Sharsha, Jessore and Charfasson Government College, Bhola upon considering the required academic qualification of the petitioners to be absorbed in the Government College while Nationalization of the same."
13. Now let us see the terms of the Rule Nisi issuing orders in both the writ petitions as appears from the impugned judgment and order which read as under:

"Rules in the aforesaid writ petitions were issuing in similar terms, namely calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why their refusal in absorbing the serviced of the petitioners as Lecturers of Government Colleges, namely Government Bir Shreshtha Nur Mohammad Degree College (Writ Petition No. 17372 of 2017) and Charfasson Government College (Writ Petition No. 16602 of 2017) after nationalization of the same upon considering the required academic qualifications of the petitioners, should not be declared to be without lawful authority and is of no legal effect and as to why they should not be directed to absorb the petitioners services as Lecturers of the said Colleges upon considering their such academic qualifications."
14. On perusal of the prayers made in the writ petitions as well as the terms of the Rule issued as per prayers as quoted above, we do not find that the writ petitioners have challenged the absorption Rules, 2000 or asked for any relief under the absorption Rules, 2018 by which the earlier absorption Rules of 2000 were repealed nor the Rule Nisi has been issued in that terms. So, the terms of the Rules Nisi in both the writ petitions are crystal clear, that the writ petitioners did not challenge the absorption Rules, 2000 or ask for any relief under the absorption Rules, 2018 by which the earlier absorption Rules of 2000 were repealed.

15. Having gone through the impugned judgment and order it appears that the High Court Division has relied on the absorption Rules of 2000 and 2018 in giving relief to the writ petitioner respondents. The High Court Division found that under the previous absorption Rules of 2000, the writ petitioners were not qualified to be absorbed as Government teachers as the minimum qualification for such absorption was the qualification applicable to a cadre post as provided in Rule 2(Chha) of the Absorption Rules of 2000. But, the new Absorption Rules of 2018 have obliterated the said requirement by Rule 5 which provides that the required qualification for absorption shall be the required qualifications for appointments in a non-government College. Therefore, the High Court Division came to a definite finding that there should not be any dispute as regards basic qualifications of the petitioners for absorption in the Government Colleges after promulgation of the new absorption Rules of 2018, which has recognized such entitlement of the petitioners for such absorption with the required qualifications for appointment in the non-government Colleges as well. So, it is clear that the High Court Division relying on the aforesaid absorption Rules of 2018 has passed the impugned judgment and order and gave relief to the writ petitioner respondents although the Rule Nisi has not been issued in that terms.

16. So, the High Court Division has travelled beyond the terms of the Rule Nisi issuing orders in both the writ petitions in giving relief to the writ petitioners by the judgment and order impugned in both the civil petitions for leave to appeal before this Division.

17. The relief under Article 102 of the Constitution being an equitable relief the High Court Division has to cautious while passing the judgment and order so that the relief which it is giving to the parties by the judgment and order is not beyond the terms of the Rule Nisi.

18. Reliance may be placed in the case of the Managing Director, Dhaka Electric Supply Company Limited and others vs Md Tamjid Uddin and others, reported in 5 LM (AD) 130, wherein the points for determination by this Division were asunder:

"I. For that the High Court Division passed the impugned judgment and order declaring the promotion of the petitioners to the post of Assistant Managers to be unlawful and without jurisdiction should be set-aside inasmuch that the terms of the Rule Nisi issued in Writ Petition No. 651 of 2012 did not entail/cover the lawfulness of the petitioner's promotions.

II. For that the High Court Division passed the impugned judgment and order in breach of the principles of natural justice inasmuch that the petitioners were never made parry to the Writ Petition No. 651 of 2012, no Rule Nisi was ever issued or served upon them and nor were they asked or given an opportunity to present then-case before passing of the impugned judgment.

III. Because the cancellation of departmental promotion after two and half years and direction to take necessary steps for promotion in making the Rule disposed of, the High Court Division went beyond the scope of Article 102 of the Constitution and thereby usurped the function of the executive and, as such, the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set-aside."
19. To answer the aforesaid points, this Division in the said case has gone through the Rule Nisi issuing order, prayer formulated in the writ petition basing on which the Rule Nisi was issued along with the judgment and order impugned in that including the provision of Article 102 of the Constitution, and thereby held in paragraph No. 16 as follows:

"On perusal of the materials on record it appears that the High Court Division, while passing the impugned judgment, found the first part of the Rule, relating to "publishing the advertisement" has become infructuous due to completion of appointment by direct recruitment in 67% of the vacant posts and, as such, in the name of consequential relief it declared the entire process of promotion to the post of Assistant Manager, illegal and without lawful authority, although Rule Nisi was not issued on the entire promotion process concerning promotion, dated 27-12-2011, of the appellants of CA No. 135 of 2015, or any such prayer being specifically made in the writ petition."
20. This Division in that case also held as under:

"In the present case, on perusal of the writ petition, the prayer portion and the terms of the Rule issuing order, it appears that the writ petitioner did not make such prayer challenging the promotion of the present appellants nor any relief has been sought against them making them parties. As such the finding and decision of the High Court Division, so far it relates to 'declaring the promotion of the present appellants to be illegal and without lawful authority', is not a correct finding and decision and rather it is beyond the prayer as sought for. The same could have been correct if the writ petitioners would have challenged the present appellants' 2½ years earlier promotion making them parties and Rule being issued to that effect."
21. Further, reliance may be placed in the case of West Bengal, Home Department and others vs Ram Chandra Choudhury reported in AIR 1973 Col 220, it has been held in paragraph-32 as follows:

"............Orders for recovery of money can be made by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction, but only in a limited class of cases, namely, where the statutory provision under which money was paid was declared by this Court to be void or where money has been paid under orders which have been struck down. The third and the more formidable obstacle to the amendment of the petition, at this stage, is that an amendment relating to recovery of arrears of salary would be wholly beyond the terms of Rule Nisi which was made absolute by the trial Court This Court sitting in appeal over the judgment and order by which the Rule Nisi was made absolute, cannot, at this stage, enlarge the scope of the Rule Nisi to which a return has been filed by the appellants, so as to enable the respondent to agitate the question of recovery of his arrears of salary."
22. Thus, in the light of the aforesaid decision it is clear that granting of such relief beyond the terms of the Rule Nisi is not approved by this Division. The High Court Division should not have granted any relief different from the terms of the Rule Nisi issued as per prayer made in the writ petition.

23. Whether the High Court Division went beyond the scope of Article 102 of the Constitution, in giving relief beyond the terms of the Rule Nisi as in the present case, we need to see Article 102 of the Constitution as well as the High Court Division Rules which deal with writ petitions. Article 102(2) provides that 'the High Court Division on the application of any person aggrieved, may give such directions or orders to any person including any person performing any function in connection with the affairs of the Republic, as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the fundamental right conferred by part III of this Constitution". So the person who wants to invoke Article 102 must be an aggrieved person and must specify the relief in his prayers. Chapter XIA of the Supreme Court (High Court Division) Rules, deals with preparing and tiling of writ petition under Article 102 of the Constitution. It provides that the aggrieved person must specifically set out the relief sought for. So, the writ petitioner must have specific claim in the form of prayer against such persons who are respondents, following which the Court can grant relief, if favourable, in accordance with law.

24. In the present cases, the High Court Division has delivered the impugned judgment and order basing on the " জাতীয়করণকৃত কলেজ শিক্ষক ও অশিক্ষক কর্মচারী আত্মীকরণ বিধিমালা, ২০১৮ " by which the earlier Rules of 2000 has been repealed and thereby directed the writ respondent-leave petitioner herein to absorb the writ petitioners-respondents herein as Lecturers in their concerned Government Colleges despite of the fact that the writ petitioners did not make any such claim in the form of prayer in the writ petition asking absorption under the aforesaid absorption Rules of 2018 nor the Rules Nisi were issued at that effect. As such, the High Court Division erred in law in travelling beyond the scope/terms of the Rules Nisi in both the writ petitions in giving relief to the writ petitioners while passing the impugned judgment and order. Thus, the finding of the High Court Division is not the correct reflection of the terms of the Rules Nisi and, as such, the same does not leg to stand in accordance with law.

25. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances we are of the view that the finding and decision arrived at by the High Court Division in both the civil petitions for leave to appeal being not based on proper appreciation of both the facts and law the same calls for interference by this Division. As such, we are inclined to set-aside the impugned judgment and order upon disposing of both the civil petitions for leave to appeal without granting any leave on the same.

In the result, these two civil petitions for leave to appeal are disposed of. The impugned judgment and orders of the High Court Division are set-aside.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 125===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH (APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 55 of 2003

Decided On: 11.12.2022

Shishubar Dhali and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Chitta Ranjan Mondol and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Nurul Amin, Senior Advocate instructed by Md. Nurul Islam Chowdhury, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: M. Qumrul Haque Siddique, Advocate and Md. Ashiqul Haque, Advocate instructed by Bivash Chandra Biswas, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 115(1); Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 103, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 19(2), Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 19(3), Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 27, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 28(1), Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 28(2)

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 04.07.2000 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 2049 of 1999

Result:
Appeal Dismissed

JUDGMENT
Borhanuddin, J.

1. This civil appeal by leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 04.07.2000 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 2049 of 1999 discharging the Rule and thereby affirming the judgment and decree passed by the courts below.

2. Brief facts for disposal of the appeal are that mother of the present respondent nos. 1-4 namely Elokeshi Mondol wife of Binoy Krishna Mondol as plaintiff instituted Title Suit No. 171 of 1981 in the 2nd Court of Sub-ordinate Judge, Khulna, impleading petitioners herein alongwith others as defendants for declaration of title; On transfer in the Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Additional Court No. 3, Khulna, the suit was renumbered as Title Suit No. 15 of 1992; During pendency of the suit, the sole plaintiff Elokeshi Mondol died and in her place present respondent nos. 1-4 were substituted as plaintiff nos. 1(ka) to (gha); Plaintiff-respondents claimed that the suit land originally belonged to Mohadeb Dhali and others who permanently settled the suit land infavour of Krishna Chandra Mondol by registered patta dated 24.01.1311 B.S; Said Krishna Chandra Mondol died leaving two sons namely Chatra Mondol and Roy Charan Mondol who in their turn transferred the suit land by registered kabala dated 16.05.1913 infavour of Rukkhini Dashi who purchased the same from her Stridhan fund; During owning and possessing 10.37 acres of land, Rukkhini Dashi settled 2.02 acres land under Korfa interest and the balance 8.35 acres was recorded in C.S. Khatian No. 36 in her name; Rukkhini Dashi died leaving only daughter Hazari Sundory Dashi who also died leaving only daughter the plaintiff Elokeshi Mondol; Plaintiff after getting the suit land by way of inheritance used to possess 15 decimals of land by settlement to Boroda Khanta Mondol and Pancharam Mondol and 28 decimals of land to Surendra Nath Bairagee for their residential purpose; During revisional settlement the plaintiff used to live at different village and she entrusted the responsibility to record the land in her name to defendant nos. 1-6 who were paternal uncles of the plaintiff but in breach of the trust they managed to get the suit land recorded in their names in the S.A. record; Although the record was prepared in the names of defendant nos. 1-6 but they never possessed the suit land; In the month of Falgun, 1348 B.S. for the first time they denied plaintiff's title; Hence, the suit.

3. Defendant nos. 1-4 and 11-14 contested the suit by filing separate written statement denying material allegations made in the plaint and contending, interalia, that one Darikanath died leaving 4(four) sons namely Banku Behari, Monmatha, Birinchi and Jagadish Chandra and while the aforesaid brothers were living in joint mess they purchased the suit land in the benami of Rukkhini Dashi who is the wife of Monmatha, with their joint money for their joint interest; The said Rukkhini Dashi was benamdar of the aforesaid 4(four) brothers; Banku Behari died leaving 3(three) brothers; Monmatha died leaving wife Rukkhini Dashi as his heir and after her death the suit land was correctly recorded in R.S. Khatian and S.A. Khatian in the names of defendant nos. 1-6 and that the suit land is not the Stridhan property of Rukkhini Dashi; Jagadish Dhali died leaving 4(four) sons i.e. defendant nos. 1-4 and husband of defendant no. 7; Birinchi Dhali died leaving Khogendra and Brindra i.e. defendant nos. 5 and 6 and they sold their share measuring 3.96 acres by registered kabala dated 02.07.1996 infavour of the defendant nos. 11-13 and delivered possession thereof; Defendant no. 14 also purchased .80 acre of land from the heirs of Nagendra who is the son of Jagadish; The plaintiff has no right, title and possession in the suit land and the contesting defendants have been possessing the suit land on payment of rent to the Government exchequer regularly; Plaintiff never inherited the suit land according to Hindu Dayabhaga Law of Inheritance as such the suit is liable to be dismissed.

4. In the trial court, the plaintiff examined 4 PWs and the defendants examined 6 DWs. All the witnesses were cross examined. Some documents were adduced in evidence and marked as exhibits.

5. Upon hearing the parties and perusing the evidence on record, learned Assistant Judge decreed the suit infavour of the plaintiff vide judgment and decree dated 26.02.1995 holding that 'by amendment of Hindu Law of Inheritance, 1929' the daughter's daughter are included as heirs and according to that law the plaintiff inherited the property left by Rukkhini Dashi.

6. Being aggrieved, the contesting defendants preferred Title Appeal being No. 92 of 1995 in the Court of learned District Judge, Khulna, and on transfer the appeal was heard by the learned Additional District Judge, Court No. 1, Khulna, who after hearing the parties dismissed the appeal by his judgment and decree dated 23.03.1999 affirming the judgment and decree of the trial court.

7. Having aggrieved, the defendant-appellants filed Civil Revision No. 2049 of 1999 under Section 115(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure before the High Court Division. In revision, the learned Single Judge of the High Court Division discharged the Rule vide judgment and order dated 04.07.2000 affirming the judgment and decree of the appellate court below.

8. Having aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division, the defendant-appellants as petitioners preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 671 of 2000 before this Division under Article 103 of the Constitution and obtained leave granting order dated 09.04.2002 in the following term:

"It is now submitted before us that the trial court wrongly held that the plaintiff Elokeshi as daughter's daughter of Rukkhini although did not inherit the suit land as Stridhan of Rukkhini Dashi according to Sections 154, 155, 156 and 157 of the Hindu Law but she inherited the suit land as per 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929' which is wrong as the above amendment is only applicable to the school of Mitakshara as it appears from said amendment itself. In not taking notice of the above important point of law the impugned judgment and decree is liable to be set-aside.

The submission made by the learned counsel for the leave petitioner needs to be examined.

Leave is granted."
9. Mr. Nurul Amin, learned Senior Advocate for the appellants at the very outset submits that the High Court Division erred in law in not considering that 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929' is only applicable to the school of 'Mitakashara' and this Amended Act has no relation with the Stridhan property as such the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. He also submits that the High Court Division failed to appreciate that according to the 'Dayabhaga' school, property inherited by a woman whether from a male or from a female, does not become her Stridhan and she takes only a limited interest in the property and on her death the property passes not to her heirs but to next heir of the person from whom she inherited it and if the property is inherited from a female, it will pass to the next Stridhan heirs of such female, thus the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. The learned Advocate referring Section 130 of 'The Principles of Hindu Law' written by D.F. Mulla and also Sections 162, 168 and 169 of the same submits that the property inherited by Hazari Sundory Dashi from the Stridhan property of her mother Rukkhini Dashi does not become her Stridhan property and she acquires only a limited interest of the property i.e. life estate and after the death of Hazari Sundory Dashi the property passes not to her heirs but to the next Stridhana heir of the person from whom she inherited it i.e. to the next Stridhana heir of Rukkhini Dashi i.e. her husband's younger brother and husband's brother's son as Stridhana heirs who are the defendants of the suit since daughter's daughter is not a heir to Stridhan under the Bengal Law and accordingly the High Court Division failed to appreciate in the light of the referred Sections of Hindu Law that Elokeshi Mondol is not the next Stridhan heir of Rukkhini Dashi as daughter's daughter of Rukkhini Dashi as such the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. In support of his submissions, learned Advocate referred the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A. 202, as well as 'Tagore Law Lectures-1878' by Gooroodass Banerjee M.A., D.L., Tagore Law Professor on 'Marriage and Stridhan of the Hindu Law'.

10. On the other hand Mr. Qumrul Haque Siddique, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents submits that the trial court decreed the suit finding that the defendants could not prove the case of ‘benami’ and plaintiff proved her possession in the suit land, the plaintiff inherited the suit land as per provision of ‘The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929’ and this finding has been affirmed in appeal and civil revision but referring paragraph-5 of the plaint he submits that the case of the plaintiff made out in paragraph-5 “নালিশী সম্পত্তি রুক্ষিনী দাসীর স্ত্রীধন সম্পত্তি বিধায় হিন্দু দায়ভাগ Law of succession অনুযায়ী বাদিনী উক্ত সম্পত্তি ওয়ারিশ সূত্রে প্রাপ্ত হইয়া.....” has not been examined or decided and as such decision/fate of this case depends on examination and decision of the question “Does the plaintiff inherit the suit land according to ‘The Dayabhaga’ law of Hindu succession?” After drawing our attention to paragraph nos.154-157 under chapter X(V) and paragraph nos.161, 162 under chapter X(VI) and paragraph no.169 under chapter XI(I) of the book ‘The Principles of the Hindu Law’ (15th Edition) by D. F. Mulla and the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A.202 as well as the decision in the case of Huri Doyal Singh Sarmana and others vs. Girish Chunder Mukerjee and others [Ind. L.R. 17 Cal, 911] alongwith Sections I and II under chapter IV of ‘The Dayabhaga’ by Jimuta Vahana, learned Advocate submits that the case of Huri Doyal Singh Sarmana and others vs. Girish Chunder Mukerjee and others [Ind. L.R. 17 Cal, 911] was a judgment Per Incuriam and does not have a binding effect and for the same reason the decision in the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A. 202 cannot be treated as binding precedent. By referring different Sections of chapter IV of ‘The Dayabhaga’ by Jimuta Vahana, learned Advocate submits that if all the paragraphs of Sections I and II of chapter IV are read together, it strongly suggests that when a daughter inherits Stridhan of her mother, she takes it absolutely like a son because son and daughter inherit “EQUALLY” and not even a single line ‘The Dayabhaga’ suggest it to become her “widow’s estate” or anything like that from which it is clear that Jimuta Vahana said that daughter inherits her mother’s Stridhana absolutely and thereafter did not say anything whether it would rank her Stridhana again or something else. Referring opinion of different Hindu jurists and scholars, (who had access to both Shanskrit and English) namely Gooroodass Banerjee, Golap Sastri, Jogendra Cunder Ghose and Mohamahopadhyayam Pandurang Vaman Kane, M.A, LL.M, learned Advocate submits that the women acquires all the rights to dispose of the Stridhana property at her will and there is no express text restricting women’s heritable right inasmuch as equality is the Rule where no distinction is expressed as such Elukeshi Mondol is entitled to get the property of her grandmother Rukkhini Dashi after the death of her mother Hazari Sundory Dashi.

11. Mr. Probir Neogi, learned Senior Advocate engaged as Amicus Curie by filing a writing submits that the contention of the appellants whether the suit property is Stridhana or not and whether Rukkhini was a mere benamder for the joint family are questions of fact decided by the courts below upon concurrent findings and the High Court Division upheld this concurrent findings of fact and now the question is 'if the suit property is Stridhan of Rukkhini, whether it could lawfully devolve upon the plaintiff Elokeshi, Rukkhini's daughter's daughter'. Referring Sections 160, 161, 162 and 168 of Mulla's 'The Principles of Hindu Law' (20th Edition), Volume 1, P.P. 264-272, learned Advocate submits that Bengal School of Hindu Law i.e. 'Dayabhaga Law of Inheritance' which is applicable in the instant case is not subscribed by identical view of different experts of Hindu Law rather it is clear that there is no consistent, uniform and firm Rule of Hindu Law imposing absolute/unqualified bar to succeed Stridhana by daughter's daughter as such plaintiff Elokeshi Mondol being the Stridhana heir in the second generation is not excluded from inheriting Stridhana of her grandmother. He also referred relevant portion of 'Tagore Law Lectures, 1878' by Sir Gooroodass Banerjee on the 'Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana' and submits that diversity of opinion of the authors/experts of customary law is an ambiguity in law and to clear that ambiguity in order to bring uniformity into the law required interpretation of this court. He next submits that judgment of the Privy Council in the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A. 202 is no bar for rendering necessary interpretation by this court to answer the question raised in this appeal i.e. whether the suit property could lawfully devolve upon the plaintiff Elokeshi, Rukkhini's daughter's daughter. He further submits that while interpreting a particular question of law in order to clear ambiguity, this court should be guided by spirit and objective of the supreme law of the land, namely the Constitution, which prohibits discrimination on the ground of sex. On this point he also referred the enactment of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 by which harmony, uniformity and fundamental reforms have been brought in Hindu Law in India and thus giving equal right of inheritance to man and women. He lastly submits that the decision of the courts below challenged in this appeal merits to be upheld expunging the trial courts view on 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929'.

12. Heard the learned Advocates for the parties as well as learned Amicus Curiae engaged by the court. Leave has been granted at the instance of the defendant-appellants to consider the following grounds:

"Elokeshi as daughter's daughter of Rukkhini although did not inherit the suit land as 'Stridhan' of Rukkhini Dashi according to Sections 154, 155, 156 and 157 of the Hindu Law but she inherited the suit land as per 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929' which is wrong as the above amendment is applicable only to Mitakshara school as it appears from said amendment itself. In not taking notice of the above important point of law the impugned judgment and decree is liable to be set-aside."
13. Plaint case in brief is that the suit land belonged to Rukkhini Dashi which she acquired by registered patta dated 24 Baishakh, 1311 B.S. and it was her 'Stridhana' property. Said Rukkhini died leaving only daughter Hazari Sundory Dashi who also died leaving only daughter the plaintiff Elokeshi Mondol who is in possession of the suit land.

14. The defendant-appellant's line of contention is broadly divided into two branches:

The suit property was not 'Stridhana' of Rukkhini, rather it was a joint family property purchased from joint family funds and Rukkhini was a mere benamder for the family;
Even if, the suit property is held to be 'Stridhana' of Rukkhini it cannot devolve upon the plaintiff Elokeshi who happens to be Rukkhini's daughter's daughter.
15. Whether the suit property is 'Stridhana' or not, and whether Rukkhini was a mere benamder for the joint family property, are questions of fact and both the Trial Court and the Appellate Court below having arrived at the same conclusion on this questions on concurrent findings of fact and the High Court Division in revision having upheld this concurrent findings of fact, this question cannot be reopened at this stage. The trial court also arrived at a finding that the plaintiff has inherited the suit land as per provision of 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929' and this finding has also been affirmed in appeal and civil revision. The submission made on behalf of the defendant-appellants to the effect that 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929' [Act II of 1929] is only applicable to the school of Mitakshara, is correct inasmuch as Section 1(2) of the said Act provides:

"1(1) ----------------
(2) It extends to the whole of Bangladesh, but it applies only to persons who, but for the passing of this Act, would have been subject to the law of Mitakshara in respect of the provision herein enacted, and it applies to such persons in respect only of the property of males not held in coparcenary and not disposed of by will."
16. So, finding of the courts below based on ‘The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929’ is wrong. The learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondents also admitted the same. But he submits that the plaintiff in paragraph-5 of the plaint stated that “নালিশী সম্পত্তি রুক্ষিনী দাসীর স্ত্রীধন সম্পত্তি বিধায় হিন্দু দায়ভাগ Law of succession অনুযায়ী বাদিনী উক্ত সম্পত্তি ওয়ারিশ সূত্রে প্রাপ্ত হইয়া.....” has not been examined or decided as such decision of this case depends on examination and determination of the question “Does the plaintiff inherit the suit land according to ‘The Dayabhaga’ law of Hindu succession?”

17. The guiding 'Principle of Law of Inheritance' under the Dayabhaga School of Law, which prevails in Bangladesh, is the doctrine of religious efficacy. Religious efficacy means capacity to confer special benefit upon the deceased person. Succession is the mode of devolution of property under the Dayabhaga system. The general Rule of inheritance is that once a property is vested upon any one, it will not be divested. But in case of Hindu woman, getting limited ownership in the property is contradictory to this general Rule as the property will revert back to the heir of the owner. Only in case of Stridhan property, it reverts back to the nearest heir of the female who is the owner of that property. It is to be noted that succession of the 'Stridhan property' is held absolutely by a female. The word Stridhan is derived from the term 'Stri' which means woman and 'Dhan' which means property. A Hindu woman may acquire property from various sources. She may acquire property through gifts, inheritance as well as her own skill and labor.

18. "The Principles of Hindu Law" by D.F. Mulla is one of the most frequently consulted book on the point at issue. The 15th Edition of the book with supplement of 1986 by Sundarlal T. Desai contain the commentaries as written before 1956 divided into Chapters and Paragraph numbers. Paragraph Nos. 154 to 157 of Chapter X(V), Paragraph Nos. 161, 162 of Chapter X(VI), and Paragraph No. 169 of Chapter XI(I) are relevant for the present case.

19. It appears that Bengal School of Hindu Law i.e. Dayabhaga Law of Inheritance which is applicable in the instant case is not subscribed by identical view of different experts of Hindu Law. Some of the very important divergent views on this point are mentioned below:

In Mulla's 'The Principles of Hindu Law' (20th Edition, Vol. 1, pp. 264-272), while describing Rules common to all the Schools, these have been contemplated:

§ 160. Stridhana heirs take per stripes

Stridhana heirs in the second generation, i.e., son's, daughter's sons, and daughter's daughters, take per stripes and not per capita.
(emphasis added)

§ 161. Where stridhana heir is a male

A male inheriting stridhana takes it absolutely, and on his death, it passes to his heirs.
Stridhana heirs are either males, such as sons, daughter's sons, son's sons, etc., or they are females, such as daughter, daughter's daughters, etc.
(emphasis added)

§ 162. Where stridhana heir is a female

According to the Bombay School, a female inheriting stridhana takes it absolutely, and on her death, it passes to her heirs. According to all other schools, a female inheriting stridhana takes a limited interest in it, and on her death, it passes not to her heirs, but to the next stridhana heir of the female from whom she inherited it.
(emphasis added)
Illustration (a) of § 168 of the Mulla's Hindu Law states-

(a) A, a Hindu male governed by the Bengal School of Hindu Law, dies leaving a widow and a brother. On A's death, the widow succeeds as his heir. The widow then dies leaving a daughter's daughter. The widow's stridhana will pass to the daughter's daughter as her stridhana heir, but the property inherited by her from her husband A will pass to the next heir of her husband, namely his brother.
(emphasis added)
20. In the said commentaries of Mulla, even it has been stated-

"A Hindu widow may by custom, be entitled to her husband's property absolutely. [Krishna Bai vs. Secretary of State, (1920) 42 All 555, 57 IC 520, MANU/UP/0068/1920 : AIR 1920 All 101 (Bikaner)]"
21. From the above principles quoted from Mulla, it is clear that there is no consistent, uniform and firm rule of Hindu Law imposing absolute/unqualified bar to succeed Stridhana by daughter's daughters. Moreover, § 160 makes it clear that Stridhana heirs in the second generation may be daughter's daughter. In the instant case, plaintiff Elokeshi is daughter's daughter of Rukkhini, the original Stridhana owner, and, for that matter, she is a Stridhana heir in the second generation, and obviously not excluded from inheriting Stridhana of her grandmother, as it is evident from § 160.

22. Further, the contemplations of sections 159, 160 and 161 make it absolutely clear that daughter's daughters are not excluded from inheriting Stridhana. But § 162 contemplates that where a female inherits Stridhana, on her death, it passes not to her heirs but to the next Stridhana heirs of the female from whom she inherited it. In the instant case Hazari Sundori Dashi inherited Stridhana of her mother Rukkhini Sundori Dashi, and on the death of Hazari, it passed to Elokeshi who is the next Stridhana heir of Rukkhini as it appears from both the plaint and the written statement.

23. Sir Gooroodass Banerjee, in his 'Tagore Law Lectures, 1878 on the Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana' said:

"It remains now to consider the definition of Stridhana according to the Bengal school. That school is represented by its founder Jimuta Vahana and his followers Raghunandana and Srikrishna. The Dayabhaga of Jimuta Vahana, which is the leading authority of that school, gives, like the Mitakshara, a general definition of Stridhana; but, unlike the work of Vijnaneshwara, from which it differs on many important points, it restricts the application of the term to certain descriptions of property belonging to a woman. Generally speaking, woman's property has two peculiarities attaching to it:-

Firstly, she has absolute power of disposal over it, notwithstanding her general want of independence; and,

Secondly, it follows a special order of succession.

Now, the former of these peculiarities does not, according to certain texts of Katyayana cited above, attach to every sort of property belonging to a woman and accordingly, to reconcile their unlimited literal interpretation of the term Stridhana with these texts, the Viramitradaya and the Mayukha expressly affirmed that a woman's power of disposal is absolute, not with regard to every kind of her Stridhana, but with only certain kinds of it. Jimuta Vahana, on the contrary, maintains, that property belonging to a woman in order that it may properly be called Stridhana, must possess the quality of being alienable by her at pleasure." (p. 297, 3rd Edition-Revised)
24. Sir Gooroodass Banerjee in the said lecture also stated-

"The doctrine that the Stridhana which has once passed by inheritance ceases to rank as such, is not easily deducible from Jimuta Vahana's definition of Stridhana. That definition, as you have seen, restricts the term to property which woman has power to dispose of independently of her husband's control. " (p. 303-304, ibid)
25. Diversity of opinion of the authors/experts of customary law is an ambiguity in law. It is submitted that where there is an ambiguity in law, both statute and non-statue law (customary law), this Court can and is required to clear the ambiguity in order to bring uniformity into the law by way of interpretation. Such interpretations are more required for non-statute/customary laws like personal laws, as in the instant case, which stem from different sources very ancient, which were reduced into written form over centuries after they actually came into being, which took their present shape through widely divergent opinion of various religious legal experts, and which are still composed of divergent views.

26. Thus, the judgment of the Privy Council in the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another Vs. Debi Sahai (1930), 30 I.A. 202, is no bar for rendering necessary interpretation by this Court to answer the question raised in this appeal. The learned counsel for the plaintiff-respondents has submitted that the said decision of the Privy Council is a judgment per incurium, and on that score it is not binding. The word 'per incurium', is a Latin expression. It means, 'through inadvertence' (BADC vs. Abdul Barek Dewan, 4 BLC (AD) 85, para 18). In Black's Law Dictionary per incurium has been meant as follows:

Per incurium (of a judicial decision): wrongly decided, usually because the judge or judges were ill-informed about the applicable law.
27. In Paragraph 169 under chapter XI(I) of 'The Principles of Hindu Law' by D.F. Mulla, referring to a decision of Privy Council in the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A. 202, it has been stated that:

"---- a female inheriting property [Stridhana] from a female takes only a limited estate in such property, and at her death the property passes not to her heirs, but to the next Stridhana heir of the female from whom she inherited it".
28. Relevant portions of the said judgment are as follows:-

"The precise question, therefore, arising for decision is whether, under the Hindu Law of Benares school, property which a woman has taken by inheritance from a female is her Stridhan in such a sense that on her death it passes to her Stridhan heirs in the female line to the exclusion of males.

Their Lordships regret that they are called upon to decide this question upon an appeal heard ex-parte --- --- ---

---- In Bengal it is well-settled law that property inherited from a woman by a woman does not on the death of the latter passes as her Stridhan. The Rule has often been expressed by saying that what has once descended as Stridhan does not so descend again. The authorities have been collected and reviewed in Huri Doyal Singh Sarmana vs. Girish Chundar Mukerjee (Ind. L. R. 17 Cal. 911). ---"
29. Examining the decision in the case of Huri Doyal Singh Sarmana vs. Girish Chundar Mukerjee [Ind. L.R. 17 Cal, 911] the following relevant observation are found:

"--- --- from the Dayabhaga, Chapter IV, Section I --- --- and there is not the slightest indication that inherited property in the author's opinion would rank as Stridhan. In Chapter XI, Section II, Paragraphs 30 and 31 of the same treatise, when treating of the daughter's succession to the father's property, the author says that the principle laid down in the case of widow (Chapter XI, Section I, Section 56), that on her death the inheritance passes to the next heir of the last full owner, the husband, 'is applicable generally to the case of succession of a woman's succession by inheritance'. It is true that this is said in a Chapter of the work relating to succession to the property of a male, but the language is quiet general.----

--- --- whenever a woman succeeds to property by inheritance, the property on her death passes not to her heir, but to the next heir of the last full owner who would have succeeded in the first instance if she had not been in existence ----"
30. The 17 Ind. L.R. Cal 911 case was decided relying on Chapter XI Section II of the Dayabhaga. But title of Chapter XI of the Dayabhaga by Jimuta Vahana is "On succession to the estate of one who leaves no male issue", title of Section I of this Chapter is "On the widow's right of succession" and that of Section II of this Chapter is "On the right of Daughter and Daughter's Son."

31. On the other hand, title of Chapter IV of the Dayabhaga by Jimuta Vahana is "Succession to Women's Property".

32. Title of Section I of this Chapter is "Separate property of a Woman defined and explained".

33. Title of Section II of this Chapter is "Succession of a woman's children to her separate property."

34. From a plain reading of the "Dayabhaga" we find:

Section I of Chapter IV of "The Dayabhaga" defined and explained separate property of a woman in paragraphs 1 to 26. An examination of the said paragraphs shows that at least 6 kinds of properties have been enumerated in this section, which materially differs from what has been discussed in the book written by D.F. Mulla.
At the end of paragraph 17 of section I it has been stated "---- and after her death, descends to her offspring."
Section II of Chapter IV deals with succession to STRIDHANA named separate property of woman and there are 29 paragraphs in this Section.
Paragraph I of this Section quotes Manu to have said, "When the mother is dead, let all the uterine brothers and the uterine sisters equally divide the maternal estate."
Paragraph 2 says "--- --- Meaning of this passage must be this: "Let sisters and brothers of the whole blood share the estate."
Paragraph 8 says the term "Equal" is unquestionably pertinent, as it obviates the supposition, that deductions of a twentieth and the like shall be allowed in the instance of the estate of the mother's estate, as in that of the father's. Therefore, the half-learned person who argues, that the declaration of equality is impertinent, must be disregarded by the wise, as unacquainted with the letter of the law, and with the reasoning which has been set forth." (emphasis added)
Paragraph 12 of Section II says, "on failure of all these above-mentioned, including the daughter's son and the son's grandson, the barren and the widowed daughters both succeed to their mother's property; For they also are her offspring; and the right of others to inherit is declared to be on failure of issue."
35. If all the paragraphs of sections I and II of Chapter IV are read together, it strongly suggests beyond all shadow of doubts that when a daughter inherits Stridhan of her mother, she takes it absolutely like a son because son and daughter inherit "EQUALLY" and not even a single line of "The Dayabhaga" suggests it to become her "widow's estate" or anything like that. Consequences of widow's estate are depicted in Chapter XI of "The Dayabhaga".

36. Thus it is clear that, Jimuta Vahana said that daughter inherits her mother's Stridhana absolutely, and thereafter did not say anything whether it would rank her Stridhana again or something else, it would be totally beyond jurisdiction, competence, and authority of

all governed by "The Dayabhaga",
the lawyers, and
even the Judges, how high so ever,
to add something in the Dayabhaga to deprive the daughter's daughter from her mother's or maternal grandmother's "separate property" or "absolute property".

37. In this connection it would be wise to examine the opinion of the famous Hindu jurists and scholars (who had access to both Sanskrit and English), expressed in their laborious works on 'Hindu Law' both before and after the judgment of the Privy Council in Sheo Shankar Lal's case (30 I.A. 202).

38. Gooroodass Banerjee: In Tagore Law Lectures-1878, Lectures XI and XII on Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhan delivered by Gooroodass Banerjee, M.A., D.L., Tagore Law Professor said (at page 411)-

"the Bengal lawyers divide Stridhan into the following three classes with reference to the relative rights of sons and daughters:-

I. The Yautuka.
II. Property given by the father.
III. All other description of Stridhana.

With reference to class III, which is the main class, Jimuta Vahana cites the following texts:-
Manu: When the mother is dead, let all the uterine brothers and the uterine sisters equally divide the maternal estate.

---- on turning to the Dayabhaga Chapter IV, Section 2, On the succession of a women's children to her separate property, in the third sloke, the law is thus laid down-'A woman's property goes to her children, and the daughter is a sharer with them, provided she be unaffianced.'

----- after the daughter's son, Jimuta Vahana admits the barren and the widowed daughters, though they are unfit to confer spiritual benefit, on the ground that 'they also are her offspring' and that 'the right of others to inherit is declared to be on failure of issue', that is in other words, on the ground of natural love and affection. Thus, Jimuta Vahana so far allows the doctrine of spiritual benefit to be subordinated to other considerations."
39. Golap Sastri, in his precious investigative work 'Hindu Law' 4th Edition, 1910 dealt with the point in Chapter XII. Quoting from the original texts the author drew his conclusions. He observed at Page No. 638 as follows:

"---- and certain women are declared heirs to Stridhana property. According to the codes, the property inherited by women became their Stridhana; because the very fact of one's becoming heir to another's estate, means, that the former acquires all the rights of the deceased over his property, and because there is no express text restricting women's heritable right."
40. At page 639 he observed:

"And thus the Bengal women's position with curtailed heritable right is superior to that of Mitakshara women -----"
41. At page 659 he said:

"If any Bengali be asked as to the law by which he is governed, the answer will be invariably received that he is governed by the Dayabhaga; nobody will name either Srikrishna or Dayakarma-Shangraha.

Now not only there is nothing in the Dayabhaga in support of the above view on the contrary, a perusal of Chapter IV of the Dayabhaga wherein Stridhana and its devolution are discussed, will convince the reader that the daughter takes the same interest in their mother's Stridhana as sons.

Because it is a peculiar doctrine of the founder of the Bengal school, that sons and daughters equally inherit their mother's non-jautuka Stridhana, and in arguing out this position, he refers to the well-known maxim that, "Equality is the Rule where no distinction is expressed." It is difficult to understand how in the face of what the founder maintains, namely, that the heritable right of the son and the daughter is equal, can it be contended that they take different estates. This would be over-ruling Jimuta Vahana by Srikrishna.

Besides in nine hundred and ninety-nine cases out of every thousand, Stridhana consists of movables only; and the heir male or female takes it absolutely, according to the popular belief and usage. That the female heir takes only a limited interest, and is not absolutely entitled, is an idea which is not known to the people, nor even to the persons likely to become reversioners. If that were the law, how is it that there is no provision made by Hindu Law for the protection of the future interest of the reversioners?"
42. Jogendra Cunder Ghose, in his 'The Principles of Hindu Law' Volume-1, first published in 1917 at page 352 had observed:

"The Privy Council has held that the descent to such property is not governed by the rules of succession to Stridhana but goes to the heirs of her other property. The Smritis as well as the commentaries, except the Mayukha, contained no provisions, regarding succession to a female's property other than her Stridhana and the family property inherited from the husband and son. We are thus placed in a very difficult position and when a female leaves no son but a daughter's daughter, who would be the heir of her Stridhana, such daughter will not take; and indeed, any special rules of succession to such property that may be laid down will have no texts or commentaries to support them. Indeed, there is no authority in the Smritis for this position."
43. Mohamahopadhyayam Panduang Vaman Kane, M.A, LL. M, Advocate in his esteemed book "The History of Dharmasastra" Volume III published by Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona, 1946 at page 789 stated 'Manu (IX.192-193) provides:

"When the mother dies all the full brothers and full sisters should equally divide the mother's estate. Even to the daughters of those daughters something should be given (that is) as much as would be seemly out of the estate of their grandmother on the ground of affection."
44. All the above-mentioned scholars in the field of law were also members of the Hindu Community of Bengal. It must be presumed that they were aware and acquainted with the faith, customs, and usages of the Hindus of Bengal as to 'partition of Stridhan'. What they have opined in their reputed works are now the best available aid to construction of the text of "The Dayabhaga".

45. From the discussions made above, it can be said that the decision passed in Huri Doyal Singh Sarmana and others vs. Girish Chunder Mukerjee and others [Ind. L.R. 17 Cal, 911] and the decision in the case of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai (1903), reported in 30 I.A. 202 does not have a binding effect and cannot be treated as a binding precedent.

46. It is an elementary principle of law that what devolve upon the successor from the predecessor are all rights and liabilities of the predecessor attached to and arising of a certain property. In that view of the matter, the Stridhana being absolute ownership of a woman, on her death, absolute ownership devolve upon her heir, no matter whether it is called Stridhana or not. Even in the judgment of Sheo Shankar Lal and another vs. Debi Sahai, it has been observed by the Privy Council:

"During the voluminous discussions, ancient and moderned which have arisen with regard to the separate property of woman under Hindu Law, its qualities, its kinds, and its lines of descents, the question has constantly been found in the forefront, What is Stridhana? The Bengal School of the lawyers have always limited the use of the term narrowly, applying it exclusively or nearly exclusively to the kinds of woman's property enumerated in the primitive sacred texts. The author of the Mitakshara and some other authors seem to apply the term broadly to every kind of property which a woman can possess, from whatever source it may be derived. Their Lordships do not propose to dwell upon this particular question. It may perhaps be regarded as one mainly of phraseology, not necessarily involving, however it be answered, much distinction in the substance of the law; for most of the old commentators recognize with regard to the property of a woman, whether called Stridhana or by any other name, that there may be room for differences in its line of descent according to the mode of its acquisition."
47. In Chapter IV, Sub-section 8 of Section II, relating to succession of a woman's children to her separate property described by Jimuta Vahana in 'Dayabhaga' is as follows:

But if one should propose this solution: 'the ordaining of equal participation is fit, if the brother and sister have alike a right of succession to their mother's property; but, if sisters only inherit equally, or, on failure of them, brothers only, the declared equality would be impertinent, since it might be deduced, without such declaration, from reasoning, because no exception to it has been specified:' he might be thus answered [by an obstinate antagonist:‡] It is no less impertinent to declare equality, on the assumption, that brother and sister inherit: since their parity may be in like manner deduced from reasoning.' [The antagonist might proceed to say+]. Besides, how is it impertinent? Since, in the case of brothers inheriting alone, [upon failure of sister,‡] the term "equal" is unquestionably pertinent, as it obviates the supposition, that deductions of a twentieth and the like shall be allowed in the instance of the mother's estate, as in that of the father's. Therefore, the half learned person [who argues, that the declaration of equality would be impertinent, (sic)] must be disregarded by the wise, as unacquainted with the letter of the law, and with the reasoning [which has been here set forth.]
(emphasis added)
48. To ensure 'equality' between male and female, Indian Parliament by amending section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 declared property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property in the following manner:

(1) any property possessed by a Female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner.

Explanation.-In this sub-section, "property" includes both movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any other manner whatsoever, and also any such property held by her as Stridhana immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(emphasis added)
49. Again, Section 15 under the caption General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus runs as follows:

(1) The property of female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the Rules set out in section 16.-
(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) and the husband;
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.
50. Furthermore, the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is the solemn expression of the will of the people and the supreme law of the land. The principles of 'equality' before the law and 'equal protection' of the law are also incorporated in the Constitution as Fundamental Rights. It has been stated in Article 27 of the Constitution that:

'All citizens are equal before law and are entitled to equal protection of law.'
51. One of the Fundamental Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of Bangladesh as provided in Article 19(2) is that:

'The State shall adopt effective measures to remove social and economic inequality between man and man and to ensure the equitable distribution of wealth among citizens, and of opportunities in order to attain a uniform level of economic development throughout the Republic.'
52. Again, Article 19(3) of the Constitution further declare that:

'The State shall endeavor to ensure equality of opportunity and participation of women in all spheres of national life.'
53. Formal equality is explicitly enshrined in the Constitution of Bangladesh and various Articles reiterate the principle of non-discrimination based on sex, caste, race and other motives. It has been stipulated in Article 28(1) of the Constitution that:

'The state shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.'
54. Again, Article 28(2) further provided that:

'Women shall have equal rights with men in all the spheres of the State and of public life.'
55. Under the facts and circumstances of the case and the discussions made above, we are of the view that the suit property being Stridhana of Rukkhini Dashi will lawfully devolve upon the plaintiff Elokeshi, Rukkhini's daughter's daughter according to her faith law 'The Dayabhaga'. However, the trial court's view on 'The Hindu Law of Inheritance (Amendment) Act, 1929', affirmed by the court of appeal and revision is hereby expunged.

56. Accordingly, the civil appeal is dismissed with the observations made above.

57. No order as to costs.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 117===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 142 of 2008

Decided On: 17.01.2023

Commissioner of Customs, VAT & Excise, Agrabad Commercial Area Chattogram and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Abul Khair Steel Mills Limited

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Md. Abu Zafor Siddique, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Samarendra Nath Biswas, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Ramjan Ali Sikder, Advocate instructed by Madhumalati Chowdhury Barua, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 102; Customs Act, 1969 - Section 104, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 12, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25(1), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25(2), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25(3), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25(7), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 25A, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 30, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 30(a), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 30(b), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 30A, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 79, Customs Act, 1969 - Section 79(2), Customs Act, 1969 - Section 98

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 19-7-2005 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 101 of 1998

Result:
Appeal Dismissed

JUDGMENT
Borhanuddin, J.

1. This civil appeal by leave arise out of the judgment and order dated 19-7-2005 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 101 of 1998 making the Rule absolute with direction.

2. Facts relevant for disposal of the appeal are that the respondent herein as petitioner riled the writ petition contending, inter alia, that the petitioner is a private limited company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1913 and engaged in the business of, amongst other, importing BP/MS coil, cold rolled etc.; In course of its business, the petitioner opened Letter of Credit (hereinafter stated as 'LC') on 7-10-1996 for importation of one thousand metric tons of BP/MS coil valued at USS 4,86,000 under section 25A of use Customs Act, 1969; Subsequently, the said LC was amended on 17-10-1996 increasing value of the goods to USS 4,87,500; The LC was opened relying on the notification being SRO No. 316-Ain/94/1568/Shulko dated 3-11-1994 issued under the authority of section 25A of the Customs Act to get benefit of Clean Report of Findings Certificate (hereinafter stated as 'CRF Certificate') and the condition of the CRF Certificate has been incorporated in the LC; The aforesaid SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 provides that the imported goods to be physically verified by the Government enlisted Pre-Shipment Inspection (hereinafter stated as 'PSI') Agency and accordingly a CRF Certificate will be issued and such goods on arrival in the country shall be assessed on the basis of such CRF Certificate wherein the price, quality, quantity and HS Code number of the goods verified will be mentioned; The petitioner's imported goods were duly verified at the port of loading by one of the Government enlisted PSI Agency on 15-11-1996 and the CRF Certificate was issued on 12-12-1996; After arrival of the goods at Chattogram Port, the petitioner through its clearing (C&F) agent submitted In-Bond Bill of Entry on 1-2-1997 under the Registration No. C-58875 for the purpose of assessment of duties and taxes on the basis of CRF Certificate value and accordingly the customs authority assessed the goods on the basis of CRF value and allowed the goods to be warehoused against Bond No. A-5 dated 13-2-1997; On 2-11-1997 the petitioner company through its clearing agent submitted Ex-Bond Bill of Entry for release of a part of the warehoused goods on payment of duties and taxes on the basis of CRF value but the writ-respondent No. 2 the Superintendent, Customs, Excise & VAT, Feni Circle, Feni refused to make assessment as per CRF certified value stating that there is no Rule to assess the goods on the basis of CRF Certificate value in respect of Ex-Bond Bill of Entry vide order dated 28-12-1997; In the meantime the notification being SRO No. 113-Ain/97/1705/Shulko dated 11-5-1997 was published by which several items were taken out from the list of items allowed to enjoy benefit of CRF Certificate facility and by another notification being No. 26797/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 tariff value has been fixed in respect of the petitioner's imported items and some others under the authority of section 25(7) of the Customs Act, 1969 repealing the Notification No. 16/97/Shulko dated 19-5-1997 and the tariff value was fixed at USS 750 per metric ton in respect of the goods imported by the petitioner.

3. Being aggrieved by such refusal to make assessment on the basis of CRF Certificate, the petitioner moved before the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution submitting, inter alia, that the impugned order for assessment of duties and taxes on the basis of tariff value as fixed by Notification No. 26797/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 based on SRO No. 113-Ain/97/1705/Shulko dated 11-5-1997 is arbitrary and without lawful authority inasmuch as the petitioner is entitled to pay duties and taxes on the basis of CRF value as assured by the SRO No. 316-Ain/94/1568/Shulko dated 3-11-1994 issued under the authority of section 25A of the Customs Act, 1969 and that the IX having been opened by the petitioner on 7-10-1996 prior to the publication of the Notification No. 26797/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 and the SRO No. 113-Ain/97/1705/Shulko dated 11-5-1997, the petitioner acquired vested right under a statutory notification which cannot be taken away by a subsequent statutory notification.

4. Upon hearing the petitioner, a Division Bench of the High Court Division issued a Rule Nisi upon the writ-respondents to show cause.

5. The writ-respondent No. 1 Com-missioner of Customs, Excise and VAT, Chattogram contested the Rule by filing an affidavit-in-opposition stating, interalia, that the submission of In-Bond Bill of Entry is admitted and the imported consignment warehoused under In-Bond Bill of Entry for which Customs duty, tax etc. are to be assessed and paid at the time of release of the goods on the basis of the price prevalent on the date of submission of Ex-Bond Bill of Entry and therefore the CRF Certificate as issued was not entertainable, more so when by the SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 the imported consignment of the petitioner was withdrawn from the list of items allowed to enjoy the CRF Certificate facility, the order of assessment of the petitioner's imported consignment on the basis of tariff value was proper. It is also stated that as per provision of section 30 read with sections 25(1), 25(2) and 25(3) of the Customs Act the petitioner is required to pay the Customs duty, VAT and other taxes regarding bonded warehoused goods on the basis of tariff value prevailing at the time of clearance of the goods from the bonded warehouse submitting Ex-Bond Bill of Entry. It is further stated that the petitioner's submitted Ex-Bond Bill of Entry dated 2-11-1997 was subsequent to the publication of the Notification No. 26/97/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 and SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 and, as such, the Rule is liable to be discharged.

6. The writ-petitioner filed an affidavit-in-reply asserting the statements made in the writ-petition and further stating that the value of the imported goods has been certified by the Government approved PSI Agency and the same has not been disputed by the respondents as such assessment based on tariff value instead of CRF Certified value relying on SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 is illegal inasmuch as the CRF Certificate granted pursuant to SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 issued under the authority of section 25A of the Customs Act prevails over all notifications issued subsequent to SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994, more so no tariff value was fixed for the item in reference at the time of issuance of the CRF Certificate. It is also stated that as per the settled principle of law the writ-petitioner, in the facts and circumstances, acquired a vested right, which cannot be taken away by any subsequent notification. It is further stated that section 25A of the Customs Act is an overriding provision of the Customs Act as been held by this Division in several cases, neither in the notification dated 11-9-1997 nor in the SRO dated 11-5-1997 there is any clause giving retrospective effect to said notifications and those are not applicable in the instant case.

7. After hearing the parties, a Division Bench of the High Court Division made the Rule absolute with a direction upon the respondents to make assessments of the petitioners imported consignment on the basis of CRF Certificate value and return the Bank guarantee furnished by the petitioner at the time of release of the goods on provisional assessment.

8. Having aggrieved, the writ-respondent No. 1 as petitioner preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1457 of 2005. Upon hearing the learned Advocate for the petitioner, this Division granted leave on 21-4-2008.

9. Consequently, the instant civil appeal arose.

10. Mr. Samarendra Nath Biswas, learned Deputy Attorney-General reiterated the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the petitioner at the time of hearing the leave petition stating that Ex-Bond Bill of Entry having been submitted on 2-11-1997 for removal of the goods from the warehouse after exclusion the goods from CRF facility and fixation of tariff value as such Customs duty and tax etc. are payable under section 30 of the Customs Act on the basis of tariff value and thus the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. He also submits that the High Court Division erred in law in not considering that section 25A of the Customs Act does not apply in this case and under section 30 of the Act the writ-petitioner is require to pay Customs duties and taxes as well as on the tariff value prevailed on 2-11-1997 when the writ-petitioner presented Ex-Bond Bill of Entry for removal of the goods from the warehouse as such the impugned judgment and order is liable to be set-aside. In support of his submissions, learned Deputy Attorney-General relied on the decision of this Division passed in the case of Commissioner of Customs vs Monohor Ali, reported in IX ADC (2012) 451 : 8 BLC (AD)87.

11. On the other hand Mr. Ramjan Ali Sikder, learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 1 in support of the impugned judgment and order submits that the respondent No. 1 opened LC on 7-10-1996 relying upon SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 issued under section 25A of the Customs Act and obtained CRF Certificate upon inspection by the Government approved PSI Agency as per the said SRO at the cost of importer-respondent No. 1 and the goods were warehoused by submitting In-Bond Bill of Entry dated 1-2-1997, Government sub-sequentry issued Notification No. 26/97/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 fixing the tariff value in respect of the imported goods which was after the conclusion of the import process of the goods into Bangladesh as such the goods were ought to have been assessed on the basis of the CRF Certificate value as held by the High Court Division. He also submits that the High Court Division has rightly held that the respondent No. 1 having acted on the promise made by the Government under section 25A of the Customs Act, 1969, that if the CRF Certificate is issued by the PSI Agency after inspection at the cost of importer-respondent the same would be the basis for assessment of Customs duties and taxes and the writ respondent-petitioners cannot go back from the promise as it was binding upon them. He lastly submits that the law as was prevalent at the time of opening of the LC on 7-10-1996, arrival of the imported goods and also during submission of In-Bond Bill of Entry, the assessment on the basis of the CRF Certificate as per the SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 issued in exercise of power conferred under section 25A of the Customs Act would prevail and would be the basis for assessment of Customs duties and taxes and, as such, the appeal is liable to be dismissed. The learned Advocate also relied on the case of Commissioner of Customs vs Monohor Ali, reported in IX ADC (2012) 451 - 8 BLC (AD) 87.

12. We have gone through the impugned judgment and order alongwith other papers/documents contained in the paper book and also the judgment cited by the parties.

13. Admittedly, the writ-petitioner opened LC on 7-10-1996 relying upon SRO No. 316-Ain/94/1568/Shulko dated 3-11-1994 allowing benefit to the importers under section 25A of the Customs Act and the LC was amended on 17-10-1994 to increase the value of the goods. As per terms of section 25A of the Act and SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 the goods were inspected at the port of loading by one of the Government approved PSI Agency namely 'Bureau VERITAS' and after inspection the PSI Agency issued CRF Certificate on 12-12-1996. On arrival of the consignment at the port of Chattogram the importer-respondent through its clearing agent submitted In-Bond Bill of Entry No. C-58875 dated 1-2-1997 for assessment of the goods based on the CRF Certificate and accordingly the Customs authority after assessing the goods on the basis of CRF Certificate warehoused the goods In-Bond No. A-5 on 13-2-1997. The importer-petitioner submitted Ex-Bond Bill of Entry on 2-11-1997 for removal of a part of the imported goods on the basis of CRF Certified value but the writ-respondent No. 2 refused to make assessment as per CRF Certified value stating that there is no Rule to assess the goods on the basis of CRF Certified value in respect of Ex-Bond Bill of Entry vide order dated 28-12-1997. In the meantime notification being SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 was published by which several items including petitioner's imported item were delisted from enjoying benefit of CRF Certificate facility and by another notification being No. 16/97/Shulko dated 11-9-1997 tariff value was fixed at US$ 750 per metric ton in respect of petitioner's imported goods. The High Court Division after thorough discussions arrived at a finding:

"Thus on plain reading of the provisions of said SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 and section 25A of the Customs Act, we find that the Certificate issued by an approved Pre-Shipment Agency on verification of the goods imported will be the basis for assessment and further in view of the non-obstantive clause like 'Notwithstanding anything contained in any other section of this Act', contained in section 25A, the CRF Certificate as granted as per provision of SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 issued under the authority of section 25A of the Customs Act shall prevail over all other notifications issued either under section 25(7) or under section 25(1) of the Customs Act. It further appears that the petitioner appointed a Government approved Pre-Shipment Inspection Agency for the purpose of verification of the imported goods and on such verification the CRF Certificate having been granted and the goods having been shipped prior tome issuance of SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 and Notification No. 26797/Shulko dated 11-9-1997, the CRF Certificate will not be affected inasmuch as the writ-petitioner acquired the vested right to get his consignment assessed on the basis of the CRF Certificate. The Statutory Notification No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 being issued pursuant to section 25A of the Customs Act the subsequently issued statutory notification will not affect the CRF Certificate in any way and this contention gets support from the decision in the case of the Commissioner of Customs and others vs Monohor Ali and others, reported in 2003 BLD (AD) 59 "8 BLC (AD) 87."
14. The High Court Division regarding the point raised by the learned Deputy Attorney-General in respect of applicability of CRF Certificate value regarding bonded ware-housed goods arrived at a finding that:

"It appears that the provisions of said section 30 did not put any bar against the application of section 25A of the Customs Act, rather section 25A has overriding clause over all other section of the Act. Therefore the statement that the application of CRF Certificate is not applicable in case of bonded warehoused goods has no basis. The decision of the Appellate Division being binding on us and in view of the decision of the Appellate Division in the case of Monohor Ali mentioned above we find substance in the submission of the learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner to the effect that the CRF Certificate as issued pursuant to SRO No. 316 dated 3-11-1994 is binding on the Customs authority and refusal thereto is illegal and without lawful authority."
15. The learned Deputy Attorney-General argued that the case of Commissioner of Customs and others vs Monohor Ali and others, reported in 2003 BLD (AD) 59 : 8 BLC (AD) 87 has been reviewed by this Division reported in DC ADC (2012) 451 - 8 BLC (AD) 87. The learned Counsel for the respondent No. 1 also, relied on the same case reported in IX ADC (2012) 451 - 8 BLC (AD) 87. The facts of the reported case and the point of law are almost similar to the case in hand.

16. After thorough and meticulous discussions this Division arrived at a conclusion based on the following findings:

"36. On careful perusal of section 25(7) and 25A of the Customs Act reveals that section 25(7) override of all other sub-sections of section 25 of the Customs Act only, whereas section 25A overrides all other sections of the Customs Act and thereby the CRF value certified validly under section 25A overrides any tariff value fixed under section 25(7). Therefore it cannot be said that only the items of import which do not fell under tariff value notification of a relevant period can be treated under section 25A and that if any imported goods fall under tariff SRO of a relevant period shall straightway attract the provision of section 25(7). Provisions of section 25A of the Customs Act supersedes the Provisions of section 25, which includes sections 25(1) & 25(2), 25(7), 30 and 30A of the Customs Act. CRF certificates issued validly shall get preference and the value certified therein shall supersede the value of the imported goods fixed under sections 25(1) & 25(2) and or 25(7) of the Customs Act and shall be binding on the Customs authority. Thus the goods imported with CRF certificates issued prior to 13-5-1997 shall get the benefit of the CRF scheme and such goods shall be assessed for customs duty on the basis of the CRF certificated value.

37. Thus the Customs duty of the imported goods, the value of which have been duly verified and certified by the Government approved by Pre-shipment Inspecting Agencies at the port of loading prior to 13-5-1997, the publication date of the SRO No. 113-Ain/97/1705/Shulka dated 11-5-1997 in the official gazette, should be assessed on the basis of such CRF certificated value and that section 30 of the Customs Act will not affect the value of such imported goods certified in the CRF certificates issued prior to 13-5-1997, inspite of withdrawal of such goods from the benefit of CRF scheme effective from 13-5-1997 i.e. prior to the date of presentation of the Bill(s) of Entry to the Customs authority, for assessment of Customs duty.

38. It thus appears that the out of 27 appeals under review 18 appeals being (1) Civil Appeals (on review) Nos. .................. will get benefit of CRF certificated value as the CRF Certificates were issued prior to 13-5-1997 and the remaining nine(9) appeals being Civil Appeal (on review) Nos. ............................................. are not covered by the decision hereof, and will not get benefit of the CRF scheme as the CRF Certificates were issued on or after 13-5-1997.

39. Accordingly, the review-appeals are allowed Review appeals being CA No. ......................................are allowed.

40. It is declared that the consignments imported and Bill(s) of Entry of which has been presented for assessment along with the CRF certificates issued prior to 13-5-1997 in accordance with the provisions of SRO 316 dated 3-11-1994 and SRO No. 244 dated 31-12-1996 are entitled to the benefit of CRF scheme inspite of issuance of SRO No. 113 dated 11-5-1997 and the CRF Certificated value of such consignments should be accepted by the Customs authority for the purpose of assessment of Customs duty on presentation of the Bills of Entry along with other required documents, without recourse to the date mentioned in section-30 of the Customs Act and that the Bill(s) of Entry presented with CRF certificates dated 13-5-1997 or thereafter in respect of the imported goods for the purpose of assessment of customs duty shall not get the benefit of CRF scheme and shall be guided by section-30 of the Customs Act The consignments covered by CA Nos. 332, 333, 335 to 345, 347, 351, 352, 355 and 357 of 2009 will get benefit of the CRF subject to other related provision of the law.
41. The CA Nos. 119, 120, 121, 174, 555, 556, 559 and 560 all of 2001 and the Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos. 1873-80 of 2002, as appeared in the cause list dated 19-8-2009 with Item No. 2, shall be governed by the judgment and order passed and accordingly those disposed of."
17. In view of the findings arrived at in the case of Commissioner of Customs vs Monohor Ali, reported in IX ADC (2012) 451 : 8 BLC (AD) 87, we do not find any reason to deviate from the above findings.

18. The core question involved in this civil appeal is what should be the value of goods on which the Customs duty shall be payable i.e. what is the relevant time for determination of the value of the goods. That the legal provision regulating this query is stated in section 30 of the Customs Act, 1969 talks about the relevant time for determination of value of goods including the rate of duty and exchange rate.

19. Section 30 of the Customs Act, 1969 (as it was in the relevant time) runs as follows:

"30. Date for determination of the value and rate of import duty-

(1) The value of and the rate of duty applicable to any imported goods shall be the value and the rate of duty in force-
(a) in the case of goods cleared for home-consumption under section 79, on the date on which a bill of entry is presented under that section;
(b) in the case of goods cleared from a warehouse for home-consumption under section 104, on the date on which the goods are actually removed from the warehouse; and
(c) in the case of any other goods, on the date of payment of duty.
20. Both section 30(a) and 30(b) clearly indicates that, the value of goods and the rate of duty shall be the one prevailing on the date when the Bill of Entry is presented under section 79. Although admittedly Bill of Entry can be presented either for In-Bond or for Ex bond, and two separate Bill of Entry number can be allocated in this two piece of document, section 79 of the Customs Act, 1969 only refers to In-Bond Bill of Entry and the same is evident from a complete reading of the said provision as it then was:

"79. Entry for home-consumption or warehousing.-

(1) The owner of any imported goods shall make entry of such goods for home-consumption or warehousing or for any other approved purpose by delivering to the appropriate officer a Bill of Entry thereof in such form and manner and containing such particulars as the Board may direct:

Provided that if the owner makes and subscribes a declaration before the appropriate officer to the effect that he is unable, for want of such information as is essential for submitting a Bill of Entry then the said officer shall permit him previous to the entry thereof, to examine the goods in the presence of an officer of Customs or to deposit such goods in a public warehouse appointed under section 12 without ware-housing the same, pending the production of such information.

(2) A Bill of Entry under sub-section (1) may be presented and the goods be cleared at any tune within forty five days of the date of unloading thereof at a Customs-port or a land Customs-station or Customs-inland container depot or within thirty days of the date of unloading thereof at a Customs-airport or within such extended period as the Commissioner of Customs may deem fit:

Provided that the Commissioner of Customs may, in any special circumstances, permit a Bill of Entry to be presented before the delivery of the manifest
(3) If the Commissioner of Customs is satisfied that the rate of Customs duty is not adversely affected and that there was no intention to defraud, he may in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing permit substitution of a Bill of Entry for home-consumption for a Bill of Entry for warehousing or vice versa."
21. From complete reading of section 79 it is apparent that chapter under which section 79 is included deals with "Discharge of Cargo and Entry Inwards of Goods" and the section itself is headed "Entry for home consumption or warehousing" as such section 79 is dealing with the entry document which is the In-Bond Bill of Entry and not the exit documents which is the Ex-bond Bill of Entry. Most importantly, the time restriction at section 79(2) for presenting the Bill of Entry within 45 (forty five) days since the goods were unloaded also indicates that this section is only referring to In-Bond Bill of Entry because an Ex-Bond Bill of Entry (as per section 98) can be presented within 24 (twenty four) months since the goods were warehoused As such interpreting section 79 in a manner to construe that the said section refers to Ex-Bond Bill of Entry would give rise to an absurdity and direct conflict with section 98 of the Customs Act 1969 and hence the only logical interpretation of section 79 would lead to the conclusion that it referred to In-Bond Bill of Entry and not Ex-Bond Bill of Entry.

22. Another feet that is to be noted is that at the time of presenting In-Bond Bill of Entry the rate of applicable duty is always mentioned at the In-Bond Bill of Entry (that at 'Box No. 47'), which is assessed on the basis of value of the goods prevailing on the date on which In-Bond Bill of Entry is presented and the said document also shows the exchange rate of the very day. Unless the value of goods, rate of duty and exchange is to be paid as was prevailing on the day when In-Bond Bill of Entry was presented this whole assessment in the In-Bond document would appear to be a futile exercise worth of nothing.

23. Thus the spirit of law is that the date for the purpose of calculating the value of the goods and the date for determining the rate of duty should be the same. Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that there is no justification for taking one date for one purpose and another date for another purpose.

24. From the discussions made above and the principle enunciated in the cited case there seems no plausible way to conclude that section 79 is referring to Ex-Bond document and consequently it is clear that the value of goods and the rate of duty shall be the one prevailing at the time of presenting the In-Bond Bill of Entry and not the Ex-Bond Bill of Entry document and once the In-Bond Bill of Entry is submitted any subsequent development in case of determination of value or any predetermination of rate of duty or taxes, shall not affect the value of the concern goods or the rate of duty for the purpose of payment of duties and charges.

25. Accordingly, the civil appeal is dismissed.

26. The judgment and order dated 19-7-2005 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 101 of 1998 is maintained.

No order as to costs.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===
=== 75 DLR (AD) 113===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 380 of 2022

Decided On: 31.08.2022

The State
... Vs. ...
Omit Hasan

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Samarendra Nath Biswas, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Md. Ariful Islam, Advocate instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Arms Act, 1878 - Section 19A; Explosive Substances Act, 1908 - Section 4, Explosive Substances Act, 1908 - Section 6

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.02.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 7403 of 2021

Result:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Md. Nuruzzaman, J.

1. This criminal petition for leave to appeal is directed against the order dated 16.02.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 7403 of 2021 granting bail to the accused respondent.

2. Prosecution case, in brief, is that one Md. Abdus Salam, Sub-Inspector of Detective Branch, Mymensingh as informant lodged the First Information Report (in short, FIR) against the FIR named accused persons on 14.03.2014 under sections 4/6 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (as amended in 2002) (in short, Act) and section 19A of the Arms Act, 1878 (as amended in 2002) (in short, Act) before the Officer-in-Charge, Valuka Model Police Station, District Mymensingh alleging, inter alia, that the informant along with his associates found some incriminating materials from the house of accused Nos. 1 and 2, then after interrogation police went to Munshir Vita and after searching, police found the seized materials and accused Ziaul Islam Zifa and Md. Al-Amin were arrested by them. They disclosed that they were engaged by the accused Golam Sarwar Rahat and the accused Omit in connection in the present case and, as such, they gave money for helping the offence. Hence, the accused persons committed offence under section 4/6 of the Act and section 19A of the Act. Accordingly, Valuka Police Station Case No. 15 dated 14.03.2014 corresponding to G.R. No. 70/2014 under sections 4/6 of the Act and section 19A of the Act was started against the accused persons. Hence the case.

3. The police, after completion of investigation, submitted charge-sheet being Charge-sheet No. 199 dated 11.08.2014 under section 4/6 of the Act against the accused persons which was submitted before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mymensingh.

4. The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mymensingh transferred the case record to the learned Judge of the Special Tribunal No. 5, Mymensingh for disposal and trial, who took cognizance against the accused persons under section 4/6 of the Act and registered the Special Tribunal Case No. 21 of 2015.

5. The learned Judge of the Special Tribunal No. 5 framed charge against the accused persons under section 4/6 of the Act. The said charge read over to them in which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The accused appellant on 10-10-2021 also prayed for bail which was rejected.

6. Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 10.10.2021 passed by the learned Judge of the Special Tribunal No. 5, Mymensingh, the accused respondent filed Criminal Appeal No. 7403 of 2021 before the High Court Division.

7. The High Court Division, upon hearing both the parties, by its order dated 16.02.2022, granted bail to the accused-respondent.

8. Hence, the State as petitioner feeling aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 16.02.2022 of the High Court Division, preferred the instant Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 380 of 2022 before this Division.

9. Mr. Samarendra Nath Biswas, the learned Deputy Attorney General appearing on behalf of the Petitioner-State submits that the interim order of bail granted by the High Court Division clearly shows non-application of judicial mind having failed to appreciate that the accused respondent is named in the FIR having strong prima-face and specific overt act of committing heinous offence under section 4/6 of Act. He further submits that the accused respondent being the active member of "JMB" a banned organization who was committing terrorist activities (Jongi) to make unrest throughout the whole country inspired the general mass to create unrest in the country with view to deteriorate the law and order situation in the country, to destroy our holy sovereignty, accordingly to damage the important buildings, place, the safety and security of the general mass to inspire them to destroy secularism, kill the important persons of the country from whose explosive control and possession huge number of explosive substances, banned books, leaflets, destructive materials were recovered. He finally submits that the case is under trial, at this stage, the interim order of bail will totally frustrate the purpose of prosecution case creating obstacle in the way of free/fair trial and, as such, the impugned order of ad-interim bail dated 16.02.2022 passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

10. Mr. Md. Ariful Islam, the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the accused respondent filing an application for dismissing this Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal made submissions apprising this Division that the Criminal Appeal No. 7403 of 2021 was dismissed as being not pressed by the appellant before the High Court Division, therefore, this Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal has become infructuous, as Civil Petition arose from the appeal is not alive.

11. We have considered the submissions of the learned Deputy Attorney General for the leave petitioner and the learned Advocate for the accused respondent. Perused the impugned ad-interim order of bail of the High Court Division and connected other materials on record.

12. On perusal of the case record it is revealed that learned Judge-in-Chamber, Appellate Division on 28.02.2022 stayed the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division for 06 (six) weeks and directed that regular leave petition be filed within that time. Thereafter, the petitioner filed regular petition along with a petition for extension of stay on 22.03.2022 which is well within 06 weeks.

13. Now, the moot question before this Division whether submission advanced by the learned Advocate for accused respondent is acceptable or require to explain the situation as prevail in the present case. Thus, the question is replied in the following manner.

14. It is a general Rule of custom or usage practiced in the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and followed through the years that in any pending petition, if file any application within stipulated time for extension of order of stay passed by the learned Judge-in-Chamber be regarded as continuation of the stay order passed earlier. It was recognized in view of the long standing convention and judicial discipline and maintained as good as a legal provision unfailingly by all concerned. The same view was postulated and enshrined through a written Office Order of the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh bearing Memo No. ... dated 17-10-2006. The crucial piece of the said Office Order is worth quoting:

"এতদ্বারা সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলের অবগতির জন্য জানান যাইতেছে যে, চেম্বার জজ আদালত হইতে প্রদত্ত কোন స్టే অর্ডার নির্দিষ্ট সময়ান্তে বর্ধিতকরণের জন্য কোন আবেদন সময়মত (within time) দাখিল করা হইলে উক্ত আবেদন নিষ্পত্তি না হওয়া পর্যন্ত চেম্বার জজ আদালত হইতে প্রদত্ত స్టే অর্ডার বলবৎ থাকিবে।"
15. The said Office Order simply reinforced the very existence of the said convention, custom or usage practiced in the Apex Court of Bangladesh since long.

16. There is a concept in the arena of customary international law which is known as "opinio juris" (Latin) "opinion that an act is necessary by rule of law" which requires that the custom or practice be accepted as law or followed from a sense of legal obligation. This element is necessary to establish a legally binding practice or custom. "opinio juris" denotes a subjective obligation, a sense on behalf of a state that it is bound to the law in question. If any such customs or usages or practices pass the test of "opinio juris" for a reasonable time then it is recognized as a legally provision. The same test and standard too are applied in the laws of the states since immemorial in countless ramifications. Regarding the above mentioned practice or custom it is evident that a sense on behalf of the stakeholders established that they are bound to the law in question. Hence, it could easily be said that it passed the test of "opinio juris" in its arene, as such, attained the strength of law.

17. On the basis of the above discussion the custom or usage of the Appellate Division in discussion, in our opinion, has the force of law and consequently, the order was of prohibiting nature.

18. In the case of Bessesswari Chowdhurany Vs. Horro Sundar Mozumdar and Ors (1892) reported in 1 CWN 226 (MANU/WB/0134/1892) the High Court of Calcutta decided that if an order is in the nature of a prohibitory order, it would only bind courts below when communicated. The same view is maintained till date by the Apex courts in this region. The Supreme Court of India endorsed the same view in the case of Mulraj V. Murti Raghunathji Maharaj reported in MANU/SC/0338/1967 : AIR 1967 SC 1386. This Division too maintained the same in the ruling of Chairman, Kushtia Co-Operative industrial Union Ltd. vs. Md. Mujibur Rahman and others reported in 44 DLR (AD)(1992) 219.

19. This Division, in the same ruling reported in 44 DLR(AD)(1992) 219 decided that where there is a prohibiting order of the higher court, the subordinate courts thereto is bound not to proceed with the case. The Appellate Division observed:

"As soon as the executing Court comes to know of the, stay order either by receiving a communication from the court passing the stay order or from an affidavit from one of the parties to the proceeding or in other way, it will stay its hands till further order and, if it does not do so, it not only acts illegally but will also be liable for contempt of the court that passed the order."
20. However, we too endorse the expanding view of matter by another bench of Calcutta High Court referred in Hukum Chand Boid V. Kamalanand Singh (1906) ILR 33 Cal. 927, that an order of stay takes effect from the moment it is passed and the knowledge of the court or others concerned is immaterial. However, the information of the existence of such a prohibiting order must be communicated in any way to the courts below for the purpose of proceedings to be taken against any person for contempt of the authority of the higher Court. But the operation of the order is not in any way postponed till it has been communicated to the Subordinate Court or the party intended to be affected by it.

21. The court may receive knowledge either on receipt of an order of stay from the court that passed it or through one party or the other supported by an affidavit or in any other way such as lawyer's certificate with affidavits. In the case of a stay order, it prohibits courts below from proceeding further, as soon as the court has knowledge of the order it is bound to obey it and if it does not, it not only acts illegally, and all proceedings taken after the knowledge of the order but also all proceedings taken even without knowledge too would be a nullity in toto.

22. As Officer of the Court it is the foremost duty of the learned Counsel engaged to inform the same in the courts below each and every occasion needed.

23. Before passing any order it is the duty of the High Court Division by applying its ordinary prudence to enquire from the learned Counsels concerned whether there pending any prohibitory order from the Apex Court in the matters concerned. As Officer of the Court, the learned Advocates pressing the petition too is duty bound to communicate any such information before the Court and be restrained themselves from lodging or hearing any such petitions.

24. However, with great compunction we witnessed that ignoring it the learned Advocate pressed the non-prosecution petition and High Court Division allowed the same of the present respondent for disallowing the appeal for non-prosecution on 27-06-2022 pending the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal as well as a prohibiting order.

25. In the present case in absence of any solid-concrete evidence as to that the High Court Division passed the impugned order with conscious defiance of the higher courts our considered view as eloquent above is that the order was passed in ignorance of the order of stay and it may be said that there was no willful disobedience of the order. However, it is highly expected that courts below including the High Court Division should maintain cautiousness in the matters discussed above for coming days.

26. In the result, this Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal is disposed of with the following order and observation. The application for dismissing this criminal petition is rejected.

27. Resultantly, the order of the High Court Division for dismissing the criminal appeal no. 7403 of 2021 allowing the petition for non-prosecution on 27.06.2022 is set aside and the Criminal Appeal no. 7403 of 2021 is hereby restored to its original file and number and in the category of Rule hearing. The order of stay granted by this Division to be continued till disposal of the Rule.

28. Learned member of the Bar is directed to hear the matter at once in any appropriate Bench. The High Court Division is further directed to dispose of the Rule on merit. The copy of this judgment be communicated to the Judges of the criminal Benches of the High Court Division at once for further reference and steps.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 99===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Appeals Nos. 67-71 of 2019

Decided On: 25.08.2022

Barrister Muhammad Jamiruddin Sircar
... Vs. ...
The State and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan and Borhanuddin, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: A.J. Mohammad Ali and Abdur Razzak Khan, Senior Advocates instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Bashir Ahmed, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 561A; Ministers, Ministers Of State And Deputy Ministers (remuneration And Privileges) Act, 1973 - Section 13, Ministers, Ministers Of State And Deputy Ministers (remuneration And Privileges) Act, 1973 - Section 13(1); Penal Code, 1860 - Section 109, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 409; President's (remuneration And Privileges) Act, 1975 - Section 10; Prevention Of Corruption Act, 1947 - Section 5(2); Prime Minister's (remuneration And Privileges) Act, 1975 - Section 12; Speaker And Deputy Speaker (remuneration And Privileges) Act, 1974 - Section 9

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.10.2018 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Cases Nos. 20701-20705 of 2013

Result:
In Favour of Accused

JUDGMENT
Obaidul Hassan, J.

1. The Criminal Appeals No. 67, 68, 69, 70, 71 of 2019 are being disposed of by rendering this common judgment as all the cases involve common questions of law and facts and the parties are also identical in all the cases.

2. These Criminal Appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 discharging all the Rules passed by a Single Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Cases No. 20705, 20704, 20701, 20703 & 20702 of 2013 preferred by the appellant.

3. The appellant initiated applications before the High Court Division under Section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 challenging the proceedings being Metro Special Case Nos. 219, 221, 218, 219 and 223 of 2013 in which Rules were issued with interim order of stay of the further proceedings. A Division Bench of the High Court Division finally heard all the Rules and on 19.05.2016 a splitted judgment was delivered by the said division Bench. One of the Judges of that Bench made all the Rules absolute quashing the proceedings of aforesaid Metro Special Cases while another Judge of that Division Bench discharged all the Rules and vacated the order of stay. Since there was a dissenting opinion regarding the result of the Rules, the matter was placed before the Hon'ble Chief Justice for necessary order. Pursuant to the order of the Hon'ble Chief Justice a Single Bench was constituted and the Judge of that Bench upon hearing discharged all the Rules by its judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 and granted certificate to prefer appeal before this Division. Thereafter, the appellants have come up with these appeals as referred below.

Criminal Appeal No. 67 of 2019:

4. This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 20705 of 2013 arising out of Metro Special Case No. 219 of 2012 corresponding to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 47 dated 28.12.2010 and A.C.C. G.R. No. 117 of 2010 under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 pending in the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka.

5. The prosecution case, succinctly, is that the Anti-Corruption Commission lodged the First Information Report (FIR) with the concerned police station against the appellant along with another person contending inter alia, that the appellant being the former speaker of the National Parliament received medical treatment at Mount Elizabeth Hospital, Singapore from 26.01.2006 to 12.02.2006. On his return back to the country after undergoing treatment in abroad, he intending to get his medical treatment bill amounting Tk. 27,86,364.00 (twenty seven lac eighty six thousand three hundred and sixty four only) reimbursed applied to the then Prime Minister for approval and he accordingly forwarded a summary proposal to the then Prime Minister on 04.04.2006. But the Prime Minister instead of rejecting the summary sent the same back to the appellant on 31.05.2006 vide memo No. 5.2.31.30.00.00.10-2006-82 to dispose of it according to the provisions of Sangsad Shachibalaya Ain, 1994. After receiving back the summary the appellant decided to get the bill approved accordingly. Although the Auditor and the Account Officer raised objection in respect of the said bill, but the Chief Accounts Officer of the Parliament Secretariat sanctioned a sum of Tk. 27,86,364.00 (twenty seven lac eighty six thousand three hundred and sixty four only) against the medical treatment expenditure and the appellant received the same amount reimbursed. The appellant in this way, in collaboration with the Chief Accounts Officer, Bangladesh National Parliament Secretariat illegally got approval of reimbursing the said bill amount and received the said amount. It is alleged that in the aforesaid way, the appellant committed offence under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.

6. The Anti Corruption Commission (ACC) upon investigation submitted charge sheet recommending prosecution of the appellant and another accused under the aforesaid provisions of law. The case was then transferred to the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, who took cognizance of the offence against the appellant and another accused. Challenging the proceeding of the case, the appellant filed an application under Section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the High Court Division and obtained Rule and an order of stay of the proceedings. Lastly, upon hearing a Single Bench of the High Court Division by its judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 discharged the Rule and vacated the order of stay. The appellant filed the Criminal Appeal No. 67 of 2019 before this Division challenging the aforesaid judgment and order of the High Court Division.

Criminal Appeal No. 68 of 2019:

7. The instant Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 20704 of 2013 arising out of Metro. Special Case No. 221 of 2012 corresponding to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 51 dated 28.12.2010 and ACC G.R. No. 121 of 2010 under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 pending in the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka.

8. The prosecution case, in short, is that the ACC lodged an FIR with the concerned police station against the then Deputy Speaker Mr. Akter Hamid Siddiqui along with the appellant stating, inter alia, that Mr. Akter Hamid Siddiqui, the then Deputy Speaker went to London and Moscow at his own costs with permission from the appellant. On his return to the country the then Deputy Speaker submitted medical bills amounting Tk. 1,21,703.59 (one lac twenty one thousand seven hundred three taka and fifty nine paisa only). Although the Audit Officer raised objections against the said bill of the then Deputy Speaker, the appellant ignoring the same got the said bill sanctioned. The then Deputy Speaker in connivance with the appellant received the said medical bill reimbursed. In the aforesaid way, the appellant thus committed offences under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.

Criminal Appeal No. 69 of 2019:

9. This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 20701 of 2013 arising out of Metro. Special Case No. 218 of 2012 corresponding to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 48 dated 28.12.2010 and ACC G.R. No. 118 of 2010 under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, pending in the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka.

10. The prosecution case, in brief, is that the ACC lodged an FIR with the concerned police station against Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip along with the appellant stating, inter alia, Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip of the 8th National Parliament was provided with some furniture and other goods from the parliament secretariat for the use at his residential office. After dissolution of the 8th National Parliament the then Chief Whip was requested on 16.11.2006 to make the furniture and other goods supplied earlier to him returned, but he intimated the National parliament secretariat on 31.01.2007 stating that the furniture and other goods had been damaged due to use and it was not possible to return those and he also sought exoneration from the liability of returning those goods. The appellant misusing his power accepted the prayer of the then Chief Whip and exempted him from the liability of returning those goods. In the aforesaid way, the then Chief Whip in collusion with the appellant misappropriated the furniture and other goods worth about Tk. 6,09,662.00 (six lac nine thousand six hundred sixty two only). Thus, the appellant committed offences under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.

Criminal Appeal No. 70 of 2019:

11. This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 20703 of 2013 arising out of Metro. Special Case No. 19 of 2013 corresponding to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 50 dated 28.12.2010 and ACC G.R. No. 120 of 2010 under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, pending in the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka.

12. The prosecution case, in brief, is that the ACC lodged an FIR with the concerned police station against Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip along with the appellant stating, inter alia, that Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip of the 8th National Parliament was used to reside at the 1st floor of House No. 103, S.C.C. Road, Armanitola, Dhaka and although only two electric meters were used by him at his own floor while he submitted electric bills from November 2001 to October 2006 for electric meters twelve in numbers. Likewise although he used two double gas burners at his floor he submitted gas bills from November, 2001 to February, 2005 for six double gas burners and two single gas burners. The appellant approved the said electric and gas bills of the then Chief Whip which he was not entitled to get. In the aforesaid way, the then Chief Whip in accomplice with the appellant made loss of sum amounting Tk. 4,40,087.50 (four lac forty thousand eighty seven taka and fifty paisa only) to the government fund.

Criminal Appeal No. 71 of 2019:

13. This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 20702 of 2013 arising out of Metro. Special Case No. 223 of 2012 corresponding to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 49 dated 28.12.2010 and ACC G.R. No. 119 of 2010 under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, pending in the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka.

14. The prosecution case, in brief, is that the ACC lodged an FIR with the concerned police station against Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip along with the appellant and another accused stating, inter alia, that on 29.07.2006 Mr. Khandokar Delowar Hossain, the then Chief Whip of the 8th National Parliament filed an application to the appellant mentioning that he had been admitted in Singapore National University Hospital on advice of the Medical Board and he needed Tk. 10,00,000.00 (ten lac only) for bearing his medical expenses. The bills were sent to the then Prime Minister's Office for approval which was returned back to the then Speaker. The appellant misusing his power approved the medical bills amounting Tk. 6,00,000.00 (Six lac only). In the aforesaid way, the then Chief Whip in accomplice with the appellant and another accused person misappropriated the government money.

15. In all the aforesaid cases the ACC upon investigation submitted charge sheets against the appellant along with other accused persons under Sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. All the cases were transferred to the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, who took cognizance of the offence against appellants and other accused persons.

16. Challenging the proceeding of those five cases, the appellant filed five applications under Section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the High Court Division and obtained Rule and an order of stay of the proceedings. Lastly, upon hearing a Single Bench of the High Court Division by its judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 discharged the Rule and vacated the order of stay.

17. Being aggrieved with the judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 of the High Court Division the Appellant filed the above mentioned five Criminal Appeals before this Division.

18. Mr. A.J. Mohammad Ali, learned senior Advocate appearing with Mr. Abdur Razzak Khan, the learned Advocate on behalf of the appellant contended that the allegation brought against the appellant is false for the reasons that after his medical treatment in the abroad he sent the medical bill to the then Prime Minister for sanction, but the Prime Minister without rejecting the said bill sent it back to the appellant for taking necessary steps as per provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994. In the same way the then Chief Whip too submitted foreign medical bills to the appellant which he sent to the Prime Minister. But it was also sent back to the appellant for necessary action according to the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994. On receipt of the said bills the appellant had no option other than endorsing approval of those. The learned Advocates contended next that the appellant approved the alleged medical bills and other utility bills on good faith, and if the appellant had any criminal intention to misappropriate the government fund he would not forward the alleged bills to the then Prime Minister for sanction.

19. The learned Counsels submitted further that the appellant approved the alleged medical bills on condition that he would be responsible to refund the medical bill when directed by the Supreme Court of Bangladesh to do so. Similarly, the appellant approved the medical bills of the then Deputy Speaker and the then Chief Whip by taking an undertaking to refund the medical bills, if directed by the Supreme Court of Bangladesh. The learned Counsels further contended that earlier late Deputy Speaker Mr. Humayun Rashid Chowdhury and the former Chief Whip Mr. Abul Hasnat Abdullah received the foreign medical bills to which the then Prime Minister provided sanction and thus the appellant justifiably approved the alleged medical bills. By reference to Sections 9 and 18 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 the learned Counsels contended next that the appellant being the head of the legislature was empowered to approve the alleged medical bills. The learned Counsels submitted too that the appellant had no criminal intention in allowing the application of the then Chief Whip for exemption from returning the furniture and also approving the alleged utility bills. Assailing the alleged judgment and order of the High Court Division the learned Counsels further submitted that the High Court Division without applying judicial mind discharged the Rules in the Criminal Miscellaneous Cases filed by the appellant and thus the impugned judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside. The learned Counsels lastly submitted that the cases brought against the appellant are preposterous and as such the proceedings of those cases are liable to be quashed to prevent the abuse of the process of the Court.

20. Per contra, Mr. Bashir Ahmed, the learned Deputy Attorney General on behalf of the respondent No. 1 contended that according to Rule 12 of the Special Medical Attendant Rules the appellant was not empowered to approve the foreign medical bills of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Chief Whip without the prior sanction of the Prime Minister. The learned Deputy Attorney General next submitted that the appellant without having sanction of the Prime Minister approved the alleged medical bills and as such he was liable to be prosecuted. The learned Deputy Attorney General argued that according to Section 18 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 the Speaker has the authority to use the funds at his choice, but such use of fund can only be made for lawful expenditure. The learned Deputy Attorney General finally submitted that the appellant by abusing his power approved the alleged bills and thus being the head of the National Parliament he would not get impunity for the illegality done by him.

21. Mr. Sarwar Ahmed, the learned Advocate for the respondent No. 2 adopted the submissions extended by the learned Deputy Attorney General. But however he added in his submission that the jurisdiction of the ACC would not be barred by the provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 and as such the appellant could be prosecuted according to the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.

22. For the convenience of discussion we may cluster all the cases in two categories based on the facts of all the five cases corresponding to five Criminal Appeals, as stated above. First category includes Criminal Appeals No. 67, 68 and 71 of 2019 which deals with the approval of foreign medical bills by the Speaker of Jatiya Sangsad which he was not allegedly authorized to do while the second category includes Criminal Appeals No. 69 and 70 of 2019 which deals with the misappropriation of furniture and other goods supplied to the then Chief Whip for his use in his residential office and withdrawing excessive electricity and gas bills at his residence to which he was not entitled to get.

23. Now, we will embark upon discussing the first category. The allegation against the appellant was that he sanctioned medical bills for the then Deputy Speaker and the then Chief Whip. In this regard the main issue hinges on a question whether the appellant i.e. the then Speaker of the National Parliament had the authority to give sanction to such medical bills. Let us eye on Section 9 of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker (Remuneration and Privileges) Act, 1974 which lays down in the following:

"9. Other allowances, facilities and Privileges-The other allowances, facilities and privileges of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be the same as are admissible to a Minister under the Act."
Again, Section 13 of the Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers (Remuneration and Privileges) Act, 1973 provides that-

"13. Medical Facilities-(1) A Minister, Minister of State or Deputy Minister and his family shall be entitled to such medical facilities as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), Medical Attendance Rules, 1950 shall be applicable to a Minister, Minister of State or Deputy Minister and his family."
24. During hearing it has been brought to notice of this court by the learned counsels for both sides that no Rules under Section 13(1) of the Ministers, Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers (Remuneration and Privileges) Act, 1973 has yet been formulated for the Minister, Minister of State or Deputy Minister. Thus, it is indisputably evident that the Special Medical Attendant Rules, 1950 (shortly Rules, 1950) is the only law applicable for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker in respect of their medical facilities availed in abroad.

25. Rule 2(e) of the Rules, 1950 defines the term 'medical attendance' in the following-

"2.(e) 'medical attendance' means attendance in hospital or at the resident of a Government servant, and includes-

(i) such pathological, bacteriological, radiological or other methods of examination for the purposes of diagnosis as are available in any Government hospital or laboratory in Bangladesh and are considered necessary by the authorised medical attendant; and

(ii) such consultation with a specialist or other medical officer in the service of the Government as the authorised medical attendant certifies to be necessary, to such extent and in such manner as the specialist or medical officer may in consultation with the authorised medical attendant determine."
Again, Rule 9 of the Rules, 1950 provides that-

"9. Nothing in these Rules shall be deemed to entitle a patient-

(a) to travelling allowance for a journey-
(i) for attendance by a dentist or oculist; or
(ii) outside Bangladesh; or

(b) to reimbursement of costs incurred in respect of medical services obtained by him, or to travelling allowance for any journey performed by him, otherwise than as expressly provided in these Rules."
On bare reading of Rule 9 in conjunction with Rule 2(e) of the Rules, 1950 it emanates patently that there is no scope for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker to claim medical expenses occurred in abroad from the government fund. But Rule 12 of Rules, 1950 empowers the Government for sanctioning such foreign medical treatment bills to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.

Rule 12 of the Rules, 1950 reads thus-

"12. Nothing in these rules be construed as preventing the Government from granting to any person to whom they apply any concession relating to medical treatment or attendance which is not authorised by these rules."
At this juncture, it is important to know about the medical facilities of the Chief Whip. Section 2(b) of the Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Allowances) Order, 1973 reads in the following-

"2(b) 'Member' means a Member of Parliament but does not include the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker or the Prime Minister or a Minister or a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister."
Thus, the Chief Whip falls within the definition of Section 2(b) of the Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Allowances) Order, 1973 and is entitled to get remuneration, allowances and medical facilities like a Member of Parliament.

26. Again, Section 7 of the Members of Parliament (Remuneration and Allowances) Order, 1973 provides that-

"7. A Member and the members of his family shall be entitled to the same medical facilities as are admissible to a gazetted officer (Class I) of the Government and the members of the family of such officer under the Government Servants (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1963:

Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Rules, a Member shall be entitled to a sum of seven hundred taka per mensem as medical allowance, but shall not be entitled to reimbursement of any expenses incurred by him for his treatment or for the treatment of the members of his family."
27. In view of the aforementioned provisions of law it appears that the Chief Whip is not entitled to get medical expenditure occurred in abroad reimbursed from the government fund except when the Prime Minister gives sanction in that behalf.

28. Now we may advert to a pertinent question as to whether the Appellant had mens rea in approving the alleged foreign medical bills submitted by himself, the then Deputy Speaker and the then Chief Whip. From the record it divulges that on 04.04.2006 pursuant to Rule 12 of the Rules, 1950 the appellant sent a summary proposal to the then Prime Minister for having approval of his own medical treatment bill amounting Tk. 27,86,364.00 (Twenty seven lac eighty six thousand three hundred and sixty four only). In the summary it was also mentioned that earlier the Prime Minister approved the medical bills for the treatment of the former Speaker Mr. Humayun Rashid Chowdhury and former Chief Whip Mr. Abul Hasnat Abdullah. But the then Prime Minister on perusal of the said summary without rejecting the summary sent it back to the appellant to dispose of as per provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994. The relevant segment of the charge sheet in respect of Metro. Special Case No. 219 of 2012 has been extracted below:

“উল্লিখিত ১২ নং বিধি প্রয়োগ করে উক্ত রুলের বিধান শিখিলপূর্বক বিদেশে চিকিৎসা ব্যয় নির্বাহ অনুমোদনের জন্য সংসদ সচিবালয় থেকে মাননীয় প্রধানমন্ত্রীর নিকট সারসংক্ষেপ প্রেরণ করা হলে প্রধানমন্ত্রীর কার্যালয়ের পত্র সংখ্যা নং-৫.২.৩১.৩০.০০.০০,১০.২০০৬-৮২, তারিখ: ৩১-৫-২০০৬ ইং মোতাবেক অনুমোদন না দিয়ে জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয় আইন, ১৯৯৪ অনুযায়ী ব্যবস্থা নেয়ার কথা উল্লেখ করে সারসংক্ষেপটি ফেরত প্রদান করা হয়। প্রধানমন্ত্রীর কার্যালয় হতে সার-সংক্ষেপটি ফেরত পাওয়ার পর বাংলাদেশ জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয়ের সংশ্লিষ্ট ২৩ থেকে ২৭ নং নোটানুচ্ছেদ) স্পীকারের সিদ্ধান্তের জন্য উপস্থাপন করা হলে সাবেক স্পীকার ব্যারিস্টার মুহাম্মদ জমিরউদ্দিন সরকার ২৮-৩০ নং অনুচ্ছেদে বিশদ বিবরণ লিপিবদ্ধ করে ৩১ নং নোটানুচ্ছেদে নিম্নরূপ সিদ্ধান্ত প্রদান করেন ।

উপরিউক্ত বিষয় মাননীয় প্রধানমন্ত্রীর নির্দেশ ও সংসদ সম্পর্কিত আইন বিচার বিশ্লেষণ করে on good faith and on my honest understanding of law বিলটি পরিশোধের সিদ্ধান্ত নিলাম । যদি কোনদিন উপযুক্ত কর্তৃপক্ষ এ ব্যাপারে দ্বিমত পোষণ করেন এবং বিলের টাকা পরিশোধের জন্য আইনের আশ্রয় নেন, তাহলে বাংলাদেশ সুপ্রীম কোর্টের সিদ্ধান্ত অবশ্যই মাননীয় স্পীকার মেনে নিবেন বলে এতদ্বারা Guarantee/Undertaking দিচ্ছেন। ইতিপূর্বের মত উপযোজন পূর্বক সিদ্ধান্ত বাস্তবায়ন করা হউক।”
29. From the above it has been demonstrated that being loyal to the existing law of the land the appellant sent the summary to the then Prime Minister for having approval of his own medical bill. Had the appellant any criminal intention to misappropriate the money he would not have sent it for the approval of the Prime Minister who was legally empowered to provide approval of the said medical bill. But when the then Prime Minister without rejecting the said medical bill sent back to the appellant for taking necessary steps as per provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994, he had no other alternative, but to approve the said medical bill, being the head of the Legislature. Accordingly the appellant approved the said bill bona fide on giving endorsement in the following terms "On good faith and on my good understanding of law". Moreover, the appellant approved the bill together with a certificate that he would give an undertaking or guarantee to pay back the amount, if the appropriate authority disagrees with his opinion and resort to legal process, the appellant would abide by the decision of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh. From the foregoing discussion it is palpably patent that the appellant had no intention to misappropriate the alleged medical bill.

30. Now let's discuss what about the rest two medical bills of then Deputy Speaker and Chief Whip. It is the clear standing of law that the Deputy Speaker and Chief Whip are not entitled to reimburse foreign medical expenses except with the sanction of the Prime Minister. In the cases in hand, the Prime Minister did not provide sanction to the alleged medical bills of the Deputy Speaker and the Chief Whip. But the then Deputy Speaker and the Chief Whip got the alleged medical bills approved by the appellant, for which the then Deputy Speaker and the Chief Whip were liable. Despite that the appellant approved the said medical bills in good faith as the head of the National Parliament, and on belief that earlier former Speaker Mr. Humayun Rashid Chowdhury and former Chief Whip Mr. Abul Hasnat Abdullah received such medical bills, we deduce. It has been drawn closer to our notice that the Appellant approved the medical bill of the then Deputy Speaker Mr. Akter Hamid Siddiqui amounting Tk. 1,21,703.59 subject to the condition that the Deputy Speaker would refund the said sum of money if so directed by the Supreme Court of Bangladesh in legal proceeding. Accordingly, the then Deputy Speaker submitted an undertaking signed by him to the Parliament Secretariat. The relevant portion of the charge sheet of Metro. Special Case No. 221 of 2012 reads as under:

“সাবেক স্পীকার ব্যারিস্টার জমির উদ্দিন সরকার উক্ত বৈদেশিক চিকিৎসা ব্যয় অনুমোদনের জন্য প্রধানমন্ত্রীর কার্যালয়ের সারসংক্ষেপ প্রেরণ মা করে জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয় আইন, ১৯৯৪ এর আওতায় তাকে ১,২১,৭০৩.৫৯ টাকা প্রদানের নির্দেশ প্রদান করেন । তবে শর্ত আরোপ করেন যে, যদি কোনদিন হয় তাহলে টাকাটা ফেরত দিতে হবে । সাবেক ডেপুটি স্পীকার জনাব আখতার হামিদ সিদ্দিকী এক আঙ্গীকারনামায় স্বাক্ষর করে জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয়ে দাখিল করেন যা হিসাব-১ শাখায় ১৯-২-০৮ খি. তারিখে গৃহীত হয়। তিনি অঙ্গীকারনামায় উল্লেখ করেন যে, সরকার বা অন্য কোন প্রতিষ্ঠান যদি কোনদিন আইনের আশ্রয় নেয় এবং আদালতে যদি তাহলে উত্তোলিত ১,২১,৭০৩.৫৯ টাকা ফেরত প্রদানে বাধ্য থাকবেন ।”
31. In view of discussions as made above, we find that the appellant had no mens rea in approving the medical bill of the then Deputy Speaker. Now, we turn to the case of the then Chief Whip in respect of approval of his medical bill by the appellant. From the record it transpires that the then Chief Whip filed an application to the appellant i.e. the then Speaker of Jatiya Sangsad praying for reimbursement of medical treatment expenditure by submitting medical bill amounting Tk. 10,00,000.00 (Ten lac only), which was sent to the then Prime Minister in the form of a summary for having approval as per provisions of Rule 12 of Rules, 1950. On 07.08.2006 the then Prime Minister without rejecting the summary sent it back to the appellant with a recommendation for disposal of the same as per provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994. On receipt of the said recommendation the appellant gave approval to the medical bill to the extent of Tk. 6,00,000.00 (Six lac only) on condition of refunding the said sum of money in future. Thus, the appellant was constrained to approve the said medical bill as the head of the National Parliament. The relevant portion of charge sheet of Metro. Special Case No. 223 is being reproduced below:

“উক্ত আবেদনের প্রেক্ষিতে সংসদ সচিবালয় হতে দি স্পেশাল মেডিকেল এটেনডেন্ট রুলস ১৯৫০ এর ১২ নং বিধি শিথিল করে ১০,০০,০০০ টাকা প্রদানের বিষয়ে মাননীয় প্রধানমন্ত্রীর অনুমোদনের জন্য সারসংক্ষেপ প্রেরণ করা হলে প্রধানমন্ত্রীর কার্ধালয়েরণ-৮-২০০৬ তারিখের এক পত্রে জাতীয় সংসদ সচিধালয়, ১৯৯৪ এর আওতায় প্রয়োজনীয় কার্যক্রম গ্রহণ করার লক্ষো সারসংক্ষেপটি ফেরত দেয়া হয়। উল্লিখিত সারসংক্ষেপটি ফেরত পাওয়ার পর তণ্কালীন স্পিকার ব্যারিস্টার মুহাম্মদ জমির উদ্দিন সরকার জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয় আইন, ১৯৯৪ এর ১৮ নং ধারায় প্রদত্ত করে অঙ্গীকারনামা প্রদানের শর্তে জনাব খোন্দকার দেলোয়ার হোসেনকে ৬,০০,০০০ টাকা চিকিৎসা বিল পরিশোধের অনুমোদন প্রদান করেন। খোন্দকার দেলোয়ার হোসেন ওই সময় সিঙ্গাপুর চিকিৎসাধীন থাকায় তার পক্ষে তার ছেলে খোন্দকার আব্দুল হামিদ ও কন্যা দেলোয়ার বেগম পান্না শর্তানুযায়ী অঙ্গীকারনামা প্রদান করেন। অঙ্গীকারনামায় তারা উল্লেখ করেন যে, যদি কোনদিন সুপ্রিম কোর্টের রায়ে টাকা ফেরত দেয়ার নির্দেশ প্রদান করা হয় তা হলে উল্লিখিত ৬,০০,০০০ টাকা তাদের পিতার অবর্তমানে তারা ফেরত প্রদানে বাধ্য থাকবেন ।”
Thus, it is unerringly transparent that the appellant had no mens rea in providing approval to the medical bill submitted by the then Chief Whip Mr. Khandokar Delwar Hossain and as such the appellant cannot be prosecuted.

32. According to our Constitution there are three organs of the State i.e. the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary. The Executive is headed by the Prime Minister, while the Legislature and the Judiciary are headed by the Speaker and the Chief Justice respectively.

33. The Prime Minister is the head of government of the Republic of Bangladesh. Executive authority is vested in the Prime Minister and their chosen Council of Ministers, despite the president of Bangladesh being the head of the executive having nominal power. The Prime Minister is often the leader of the party or the coalition with a majority in the Parliament, which is the legislative body in the Republic of Bangladesh. The Prime Minister and their cabinet are at all times responsible to the Parliament.

34. The position of Speaker in parliamentary system of government is as below:

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha in India is the presiding officer and the highest authority of the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Parliament of India. He conducts the business in house and decides whether a bill is a money bill or not. He maintains discipline and decorum in the house and can punish a member for unruly behavior with respect to law after suspending them. He also permits the moving of various kinds of motions and resolutions such as a motion of no confidence, motion of adjournment, motion of censure and calling attention notice as per the rules. The Speaker decides on the agenda to be taken up for discussion during the meeting.

Further, all comments and speeches made by members of the House are addressed to the Speaker. In Bangladesh Parliament the Speaker enjoys the similar power as the Speaker of Lok Sabha in India enjoys.

35. In the case of Maves Jasmin and others vs. Md. Ruhul Amin-3 and others reported in 26 BLC (AD) [2021] 239 paragraph-8, it has been held by this Division that "The office of the Speaker is held in the highest respect and esteem in parliamentary traditions and the Speaker holds an important and ceremonial office. Such respect is historical and inherent in the concept of Parliamentary democracy. Pandit Jawaharal Nehru had to say about the position of the Speaker, which is reproduced below:

"The Speaker represents the House. He represents the dignity of the House, the freedom of the House and because the House represents the nation, in a particular way, the Speaker becomes the symbol of the nation freedom and liberty."
36. This Division in the above said case rendered its decision that "The Parliament Secretariat is an independent constitutional and statutory body which functions under the guidance and control of the Speaker. The Parliament Secretariat is part of the second organ of the State. The Speaker is the executive head of the Parliament Secretariat. In the discharge of the constitutional and statutory responsibility, the Speaker of the Parliament is assisted by the officers and staffs of Parliament Secretariat. The main activity of the Secretariat is to provide secretarial assistance and support to the functions of the Speaker and Parliament."

37. The role of Chief Justice where parliamentary form of government exists is as under:

Indian Chief Justice is the chief Judge of the Supreme Court of India as well as the highest-ranking position holder of the Indian Judiciary. The Constitution of India grants power to the president of India to appoint, in consultation with the outgoing Chief Justice, the next Chief Justice, who will serve until they reach the age of sixty-five.

On the administrative side, the Chief Justice carries out functions of maintenance of the roster, appointment of court officials and general and miscellaneous matters relating to the supervision and functioning of the Supreme Court.

In Bangladesh the Chief Justice also tasked with similar jobs like the Chief Justice of India.

38. Further, in view of the judgment delivered by this Division in the case of Bangladesh vs. Md. Ataur Rahman and Ors. reported in 69 DLR (AD) (2017) 17, paragraphs 43-46, this division observed that the present position of the Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad is placed at serial No. 3, right after the Prime Minister but in 1975 both Speaker and the Chief Justice was in the same serial i.e. in serial No. 4. This division further observed that the Chief Justice should be placed in serial No. 3. Meaning thereby both the Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad as well as the Chief Justice of Bangladesh are in the same serial of the warrant of precedence.

39. Now let us see how the medical expenses of the President, Prime Minister and Chief Justice of Bangladesh and other Judges of the Supreme Court are met.

President:

40. The position of the President is at the top in the warrant of precedence and he is entitled to medical facilities abroad. Section 10 of The President's (Remuneration and Privileges) Act, 1975 lays down that-

"The President and his family shall be entitled free of charge, to treatment at any hospital in Bangladesh, that can, in the opinion of his physician, provide necessary and suitable treatment:

Provided that the President and his family shall ordinarily be entitled to receive medical treatment at the residence:

Provided further that the President and his family may, if so advised by his physician, receive medical treatment abroad or consult a foreigner or a physician other than his own and receive such other treatment at the Government cost as may be prescribed."
Prime Minister:

41. The Prime Minister being the head of the Executive Organ of the Country also enjoys medical facilities in abroad. Section 12 of The Prime Minister's (Remuneration and Privileges) Act, 1975 provides that-

"The Prime Minister and his family shall be entitled free of charge, to treatment at any hospital in Bangladesh, that can, in the opinion of his physician, provide necessary and suitable treatment.

Provided that the Prime Minister and his family shall ordinarily be entitled to receive medical treatment at the residence:
Provided further that the Prime Minister and his family may, if so advised by his physician, receive medical treatment abroad or consult a foreigner or a physician other than his own and receive such other treatment at the Government cost as may be prescribed."
Chief Justice and others Judges of the Supreme Court:

42. Being the head of the Judiciary the Chief Justice of Bangladesh has been delegated by the Government with its power (under Rule 12 of the Special Medical Attendants Rule, 1950) vide letter dated 13th March, 2013 under memo No. 10.00.0000.128.002.06.2013-355 issued by the Law and Justice Division of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs to take necessary steps for endorsing payment in respect of the medical expenses incurred by the learned Judges of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and their family members.

43. In compliance with the said letter the Chief Justice of Bangladesh framed Guidelines for Supreme Court Judges for Claiming Medical Expenses Incurred Home and Abroad, 2015 (shortly Supreme Court Judges Medical Expenses Guidelines, 2015) which was adopted in the Full Court Meeting comprising both the Divisions of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, held on 23rd November, 2015 and 23rd June, 2022 which has been acted upon and thus, the said guideline has got force of law. All the Judges of the Supreme Court and all other concerned of the State functionaries are bound to follow this guideline in respect of payment of medical expenses incurred at Home and Abroad. For better understanding the preamble of The Supreme Court Judges Medical Expenses Guidelines, 2015 is extracted in the following:

"Whereas, in the letter dated 13th March, 2013 under memo No. 10.00.0000.128.002.06.2013-355 issued by the Law and Justice Division of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, it has been spelt out that in view of the judgment of the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, passed in Writ Petition No. 10803 of 2011, the Chief Justice of Bangladesh may take necessary steps for approving the bills submitted by the Judges of the Supreme Court against the expenses incurred for their medical treatment and expenses ancillary and incidental thereto;

And

Whereas, by virtue of Rule 12 of the Special Medical Attendance Rules, 1950, the Government, vide aforesaid letter dated 13th March, 2013 under memo No. 10.00.0000.128. 002.06.2013-355, accorded concession and, thereby, delegated its power to the Chief Justice of Bangladesh to take necessary steps for making payment in respect of medical expenses incurred by the Judges of the Supreme Court and their family members.

And

Whereas, in the aforesaid backdrop and pursuant to the resolution adopted in the Full Court Meeting comprising both the Divisions of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, held on 23rd November, 2015, a guideline was approved for providing guidance to the Judges of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh for reimbursement of medical expenses incurred home and abroad, and after taking further decision by the full Court meeting comprising both the Divisions of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, held on 23rd June, 2022, it is expedient to amend and update the said guidelines, the following guidelines (as amended) have now been accepted and adopted." (Full context of the guideline is available in the Supreme Court website i.e. www.supremecourt.gov.bd)
44. Judges of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, one constitutional organ have been functioning unstintingly. Their wellbeing needs to be ensured. Chief Justice of Bangladesh being the guardian of judiciary, one constitutional organ of the State has paid due attention to this matter. Guidelines as to reimbursement of medical expenditure enunciated have been formulated formally on approval of the Chief Justice of Bangladesh.

45. On examination of the aforesaid provisions it is crystal clear that the Chief Justice of Bangladesh has the authority to approve the medical expenses of the Supreme Court Judges in home and abroad and in keeping pace with the aforesaid provisions the Chief Justice of Bangladesh has formed a three member committee by the Appellate Division Judges for discharging the task of approving the medical bill of the Supreme Court Judges.

46. But the fact remains that despite the head of the Legislature the Speaker has not been delegated with the power of approval of medical bill for himself including the Deputy Speaker, Chief Whip, Whip and members of parliament. In a fair democratic polity it is highly expected that the existence of equal and identical privileges among the constitutional post bearers of the same status. The Speaker being head of the Legislature is also no exception in enjoying approval of the medical expenses abroad vis-à-vis other two heads of organs that is the Executive and Judiciary. To that end we are of the view that the government may consider to delegate the power to the Speaker of approval of reimbursement of the foreign medical expenses for the Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chief Whip and Whip to the Speaker of the Jatiya Sangsad.

47. Now, we will discuss about the second category of the cases which are related to the misappropriation of furniture and utility bills. In Criminal Appeal No. 69 of 2019 the case of the prosecution is that the then Chief Whip Mr. Khandokar Delwar Hossain was asked by the parliament secretariat to return the furniture and other goods supplied at his residential office. But the then Chief Whip instead of returning those furniture and goods prayed for exemption to return the same and the appellant allowed the said prayer. In Criminal Appeal No. 70 of 2019 the prosecution case was that the then Chief Whip Mr. Khandokar Delwar Hossain took electricity and gas bills at a larger amount at his residence to which he was not entitled to get but the appellant approved the said application of exemption as well as the utility bills.

48. We know that the parliament secretariat is established under the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994. According to Section 4 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 the task of monitoring in respect of proper use of furniture and payment of utility bills is assigned with the parliament secretariat and the concerned department of the secretariat is responsible for making such monitoring effective. In the present cases it appears that some subordinate officers of the concerned department were bound by the rules of business of the government and to look after the alleged matters. The Speaker being the head of the Parliament simply gives approval of utility bills when the concerned Officers of the Parliament Secretariat use to place those after due scrutiny. But there was no objection as to failure of such scrutiny in respect of the alleged utility bills and accordingly the appellant approved the same.

49. In the aforesaid backdrop, we find that the appellant, in exercise of his authority, on good faith allowed the said application believing the statements of the then Chief Whip and he also approved the utility bills of the then Chief Whip bona fide. Sequence of facts does not lead to conclude that it was done with mala fide intention.

50. During hearing the learned Counsel for the appellant contended that according to Section 18 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 the appellant was empowered to approve the alleged medical bills. The learned Counsel further contended that according Section 9 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 the Parliament is the proper authority to take decision, action or raise question on the approval of alleged bills and neither the ACC nor any authority does have power to raise question about the approval of said bills. To decide about the said issue let's examine the provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act. Section 18 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 provides that-

“১৮। অর্থ ব্যয়: সংসদ সচিবালয়ের জন্য বাজেটে বরাদ্দকৃত অর্থ অনুমোদনের ব্যাপারে স্পীকার চূড়ান্ত কর্তৃপক্ষ হইবেন।”
Section 9 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 states that-

“৯। বাজেট-অনুমোদিত ব্যয়ের ব্যাপারে সচিবালয়ের দায়িত্ব: সংসদ সচিবালয়ের জন্য বাৎসরিক বাজেটে বরাদ্দকৃত অর্থ ব্যয়ের ক্ষেত্রে সংসদ সচিবালয় মহাহিসান নিরীক্ষক ও নিয়ন্ত্রকের মাধ্যমে কেবল সংসদের নিকট দায়ী থাকিবে ।”
51. From the combined reading of Section 9 together with Section 18 of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 it appears indubitably that the parliament secretariat will be responsible only to the Parliament through the Controller and Auditor General over the matter of expenditure of the financial allocation in the yearly budget and nobody else can raise any question as to the use of such budget. But in the cases in hand, those provisions of the Parliament Secretariat Act, 1994 will not give any protection to the appellant since the Anti-Corruption Commission brought allegation against the appellant and other accused persons as to the mode of approval of medical bills in doing which the Speaker was not authorized to approve without the sanction of the Prime Minister. However, we have already viewed that neither the ACC nor any authority does have power to raise question about the authority of the Speaker in approving said bills.

52. In view of the above discussions, we may conclude that the aforesaid criminal proceedings against the appellant are liable to be quashed to prevent the abuse of the process of law and the High Court Division committed illegality in passing the impugned judgment and order dated 11.10.2018 and as such the same is not tenable in the eye of law.

53. Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The judgment and order dated 11.10. 2018 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case Nos. 20705, 20701, 20702, 20703 & 20704 of 2013 are hereby set aside.

Consequently the proceedings of Metro. Special Case No. 219 of 2012 arising out of Sher-e-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 47 dated 28.12.2010 corresponding to ACC G.R. No. 117 of 2010;

Metro. Special Case No. 221 of 2012 arising out of Sher-e-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 51 dated 28.12.2010 corresponding to ACC G.R. No. 121 of 2010;

Metro. Special Case No. 218 of 2012 arising out of Sher-e-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 48 dated 28.12.2010 corresponding to ACC G.R. No. 118 of 2010;

Metro. Special Case No. 19 of 2013 arising out of Sher-e-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 50 dated 28.12.2010 corresponding to ACC G.R. No. 120 of 2010; and

Metro. Special Case No. 223 of 2012 arising out of Sher-e-Bangla Nagar Police Station Case No. 49 dated 28.12.2010 corresponding to ACC G.R. No. 119 of 2010, all are pending before the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka are hereby quashed so far as it relates to the appellant Barrister Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar.

54. However, the appellant is directed to refund the amount which he has withdrawn from the government exchequer within 6 (six) months from the date of receiving a copy of the said judgment by the trial Court.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 93===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1738 of 2022

Decided On: 19.06.2022

Government of Bangladesh and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Syed Fazle Elahi Obhi and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Obaidul Hassan and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: A.M. Aminuddin, Attorney General and Biswajit Debnath, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Zainul Abedin, Murad Reza, Senior Advocates, Ruhul Quddus, Advocate and Anik R. Hoque, Advocate instructed by Madhu Malati Chowdhury Barua, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 102, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 32, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 35(5), Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 51; Penal Code, 1860 - Section 143, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 186, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 307, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 332, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 333, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 353, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 427

Prior History:
From the Order dated the 9th day of June, 2022 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 7045 of 2022

Result:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
M. Enayetur Rahim, J.

1. This civil petition for leave to Appeal is directed against the order dated 09.06.2022 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 7045 of 2022.

2. The facts, relevant for disposal of the instant leave petition are as follows:

The writ petition-respondent No. 1 has filed writ petition No. 7045 of 2022 before the High Court Division challenging the order dated 08.06.2022 passed by the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Court No. 4, Dhaka (writ-respondent No. 6) allowing the prayer of the prosecution for remand of accused Yeasin Arafat Bhuiyan, and Sohakul Islam Bhuiyan, both are Advocates of Dhaka Bar Association in connection with Shampur Police Station Case No. 11 date 07.06.2022 under sections 143/186/307/353/332/333/427 of the Penal Code and also for a direction upon the writ-respondent No. 1 to transfer the case to any other organization other than the police.

3. The above writ petition has been filed claiming to be public interest litigation.

4. In the writ petition it is contended that the writ petitioner, an Advocate, observed a video footage and found that Yasin Arafat Bhuiyan and Sohakul Islam Bhuiyan, two members of Dhaka Bar Association while coming to Dhaka court for performing professional duty, they were harassed by some police personnel and they also physically tortured by them and subsequently a First Information Report was lodged against them and others by the police upon which Shampur Police Station Case No. 11 dated 07.06.2022 under Section 143/186/307/353/332/333/427 of the Penal Code has been started.

5. In connection with the said case police arrested the said two persons and also wife of accused Yasin Arafat Bhuiyan and others and eventually, police forwarded them to the court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka along with an application for remand. After hearing of the application the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, respondent No. 6, allowed three days police remand by the order dated 08.06.2022.

6. It is further contended in the writ petition that the police remand is not a judicial order, the said persons have been detained illegally, the victim and the Investigating Agency both are from same community so no proper investigation will be held and the detenue will be prejudiced and thus a direction for judicial inquiry is needed.

7. The High Court Division after hearing the said writ petition on 09.06.2022 issued Rule and an ad-interim order on the following terms:

"Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the remand of the detenues should not be declared to have been done without lawful authority and violative to the fundamental rights guaranteed to the detenues in our Constitution and guideline and observations given by our apex court in regard to remand and why the respondent No. 6 should not be directed to transmit the record of Shampur Police Station Case No. 11 dated 07.06.2022 before this court and/or pass such other or further order and orders as to this court may seem fit and proper.

The Rule is made returnable within 4(four) weeks from date.

Pending hearing of the Rule, the respondent No. 6 is hereby directed to certify and transmit, the record of Shampur Police Station Case No. 11 dated 07.06.2022 to this court by 1.00 P.M. on 12.06.2022 through the office of the Registrar, High Court Division. Supreme Court of Bangladesh by special messenger to be dealt with in accordance with law.

The petitioner is directed to put in requisites for service of notices of the rule upon the respondents by a special messenger at his own cost to be deposited to the respective office by today.

Let this matter appear in the list at 02.00 p.m. on 12.06.2022 as an 'order'."
8. Feeling aggrieved by the said order the State has preferred the instant leave petition.

9. Mr. A.M. Aminuddin, learned Attorney General, appearing for the leave petitioners submits that the writ-petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the order of police remand, as he is not an aggrieved person. Moreso, the provision of police remand has been stipulated in the Code of Criminal Procedure.

10. Learned Attorney General further submits that the High Court Division erred in law in entertaining the writ petition without considering the fact that no statement has been furnished in the writ petition as to the infringement of any fundamental right of the accused persons or the petitioner and as such both the Rule issuing order as well as the ad-interim order passed by the High Court Division is illegal and without jurisdiction.

11. He further submits that the writ petition has been filed on the plea of greater public interest; however, the facts and circumstances of the present case do not show that any public interest is involved in the writ petition. The accused were allowed to remand which is a judicial order and said order cannot be challenged in writ jurisdiction by a 3rd party on the plea of public interest and as such the Rule issuing order and as well as the ad-interim order passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

12. Mr. Anik-R-Haque, learned Advocate, appearing for the writ-petition-respondent submits that the High Court Division considering the facts and circumstances of the present case rightly issued the Rule and passed the ad-interim order and since, in the meantime the accused have been granted bail by the Court below, the present leave petition has become in fructuous.

13. Heard the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the rule issuing order and the ad-interim order passed by the High Court Division.

14. In the instant case, writ petitioner filed the writ petition challenging the order dated 08.06.2022 passed by the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka respondent No. 6, in allowing two accused of the case, who are the members of the Dhaka Bar Association for three days remand in connection with Shampur Police Station Case No. 11 dated 07.06.2022 and also for holding the investigation of the case to another organization rather than the police.

15. Two Advocates who are accused of the above mentioned case were arrested by the police on specific allegation and thereafter, on behalf of the prosecution an application was filed for their remand and the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, respondent No. 6 upon hearing the respective parties allowed three days remand.

16. The learned Magistrate passed the said order within the scope of the law i.e. under the provision of Code of Criminal Procedure. The order passed by a Magistrate cannot be challenged in the garb of public interest litigation under Article 102 of the Constitution of the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh, as the order passed by a Magistrate is revisable one under revisional jurisdiction before the concerned Court of Sessions. If, the accused against whom the order of remand has been made are aggrieved by the said order then they have the forum to move before the concerned Court of Sessions in its revisional jurisdiction. A 3rd person has no locus-standi to challenge the said order of remand under Article 102 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh before the High Court Division. The High Court Division failed to consider this factual and legal proposition and on erroneous view issued Rule and passed ad-interim order. When a Judicial Officer passed an order within the ambit of a particular law i.e. under the Code of Criminal Procedure said order cannot be interfered with under Article 102 of the Constitution of the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh unless said order is without jurisdiction or suffers from quorum non-judice.

17. In the writ petition it is contended that order of remand passed by the Magistrate is not a judicial order and forum of revision is not an efficacious one. The above contentions are absolutely misconceived and not tenable in law.

18. In revision, the concerned court has got the power to pass any ad-interim order including stay operation of the impugned order.

19. It is pertinent to mention here that in the writ petition the FIR has not been annexed or quoted. However, application for remand has been quoted which is as follows:

“বরাবর,
বিজ্ঞ চীফ মেট্রোপলিটন ম্যাজিষ্ট্রেট,
ঢাকা মহানগর আদালত ,

মাধ্যমঃ উপ-পুলিশ কমিশনার (প্রসিকিউশন), মহানগর আদালত, ডিএমপি, ঢাকা |

বিষয়ঃ আসামীদের বিজ্ঞ আদালতে প্রেরণ সহ ০৭ (সাত) দিনের পুলিশ রিমান্ডের আবেদন।

সূত্রঃ শ্যামপুর থানার মামলা নং-১১, তাং-০৭/০৬/২০২২ইং ধারা-
১৪৩/১৮৬/৩০৭/৩৫৩/৩৩২/৩৩৩/৪২৭ পেনাল কোড-১৮৬০; পেনাল কোড ।

জনাব,
যথাবিহীন সম্মান প্রদর্শন পূর্বক বিনীত নিবেদন এই যে, সুত্রে বর্ণিত মামলার এজাহারনামীয় আসামী ১। সোহাকুল ইসলাম রনি (৩২), পিতা-নজরুল ইসলাম, মাতা-শিরিন সুলতানা, সাং-নারায়নপুর, থানা-মুকসুদপুর, জেলা-গোপালগঞ্জ, ২। ইয়াসিন আরাফাত ভূইয়া (২৮), পিতা-ইয়ার মোহাম্মদ ভূইয়া, মাতা-নাজমুন নাহার, সাং-১০৬ নং রজ্জব আলী সরদার রোড, থানা-কদমতলী, ঢাকা এবং তদন্তে প্রাপ্ত সন্ধিগ্ধ গ্রেফতারকৃত আসামী ৩। মোঃ শরিফ (৩৪), পিতা-মৃত জালাল উদ্দিন মাঝী, মাতা-মৃত ভুলু বেগম, সাং-১০৬ নং রজ্জব আলী সরদার রোড, থানা-কদমতলী, ঢাকা, ৪। মোঃ নাহিদ (২৪), পিতা-মোঃ কামাল হোসেন, মাতা-নুকুন্নাহার বেগম, সাং-১০৬ নং রজ্জব আলী সরদার রোড , থানা-কদমতলী, ঢাকা, ৫ | মোঃ রাসেল (১৯), পিতা-মোঃ আসাদ, মাতা-মোছাঃ আনোয়ারা বেগম, সাং-শংকটারী, থানা-আদিতমারী, পুলিশ স্কটের মাধ্যমে আপনার বিজ্ঞ আদালতে সোপর্দসহ ০৭(সাত) দিনের পুলিশ রিমান্ডের আবেদন পূর্বক এই প্রতিবেদন দাখিল করিতেছি যে, আসামীরা সকলেই উগ্র-উশৃঙ্খল প্রকৃতির । গত ইং ০৭/০৬/২০২২ তারিখ সকাল ০৬.০০ ঘটিকা হইতে বেলা ১৪.০০ ঘটিকা পর্যন্ত বাদী সঙ্গীয় এটিএসআই/হাবিব, কং/২২৮৯৭ সিরাজ, কং/৫৫৭৬ মাহবুব, কং/৩৫৪৪৬ আবেদ, শ্যামপুর থানাধীন জুরাইন রেল গেট এলাকায় টেঙ্গু ৪৩৬ কল সাইনে ট্রাফিক ডিউটিতে নিয়োজিত হন। সকাল অনুমান ০৯.৩০ ঘটিকার সময় শ্যামপুর থানাধীন ঢাকা মাওয়া ইনকামিং রোড জুরাইন রেলগেট সংলগ্ন জুরাইন নতুন রাস্তার মুখে ডিউটি করাকালে রাস্তায় গাড়ীর চাপ থাকা স্বত্বেও মামলার এজাহার নামীয় আসামী-১। সোহাকুল ইসলাম রনি (৩২) এবং ২। ইয়াসিন জাহান নিশান ভূইয়া (২০) দ্বয় ঢাকা মেট্রো-ল-১৪-৮৪৭৯ নাম্বারের একটি মোটর সাইকেল যোগে ০১ জন হেলমেট বিহীনসহ ০২ জন মোটর সাইকেল আরোহী যাত্রাবাড়ীর দিক হইতে জুরাইন রেল গেটের দিকে উল্টোপথে আসে । তখন বাদী তাহাদের উল্টোপথে আসার কারণ জিজ্ঞাসা করেন এবং গাড়ীর কাগজপত্র দেখতে চায় । কিন্তু আসামীদয় বাদীকে কাগজপত্র না দেখিয়ে বাদীকে অকথ্য ভাষায় গালিগালাজ করিতে থাকে এবং বাদী ইউনিফর্মধারী হওয়া স্বত্বেও বাদীর কাগজপত্র দেখাতে বলে। বাদী পুনরায় তাহাদের নিকট গাড়ীর কাগজপত্র দেখানোর জন্য অনুরোধ করিলে তাহারা সরকারী কাজে বাধা প্রদানসহ বাদীর উপর ক্ষিপ্ত হয় এবং এজাহার নামীয় ২নং আসামী ডাক চিৎকার করিয়া পথচারী লোকজনসহ ঘটনাস্থলে উপস্থিত লোকজনকে চরম উত্তেজিত করিয়া তোলে এবং বাদীকে সহ বাদীর সাথে ডিউটিরত অফিসার ও ফোর্সদের উপ হামলা করার জন্য উষ্কানী দিতে থাকে । একই সময়ে বিবাদীদ্বয় মোবাইল ফোনের মাধ্যমে তাহার আত্তীয়স্বজন ও পরিচিত লোকদের ঘটনাস্থলে আসতে বলে । ইতিমধ্যে বেতার মাধ্যমে সংবাদ প্রাপ্ত হইয়া শ্যামপুর থানার টহল টিমের এসআই/উৎপল দত্ত অপু সঙ্গীয় অফিসার ও ফোর্সসহ ঘটনাস্থলে উপস্থিত হয়। তখন ৩নং আসামী ইয়াসিন আরাফাত ভূইয়া (২৮) দলবল নিয়া ঘটনাস্থলে আসে । উপরোক্ত আসামীদের নেতৃত্বে অজ্ঞাতনামা ৩৫০/৪০০ জন আসামী একযোগে দলবদ্ধ হইয়া জুরাইন রেল গেইট সংলগ্ন ট্রাফিক পুলিশ বক্স সম্পূর্ণ ভাংচুর করিয়া প্রায় ৮,০০,০০০/- (আট লক্ষ) টাকার ক্ষতি সাধন করে এবং বাদীর নামে ইস্যুকৃত সরকারী মোটর সাইকেল, যাহার রেজি নং-ঢাকা মেট্রো-হ-১৪-৪১৭৫ ভাংচুর করিয়া ক্ষতি সাধন করে। অতঃপর ১, ২ ও ৩ নং আসামীর নেতৃত্বে অজ্ঞাতনামা আসামীরা হত্যার উদ্দেশ্যে পুলিশকে লক্ষ্য করে ইট পাটকেল, পাথর নিক্ষেপ করিতে থাকে এবং কিল, ঘুষি, লাথি মারে ও লাঠি দিয়া এলোপাথারীভাবে পিটাইতে থাকে ৷ আসামীরা বাদীসহ অন্যান্য পুলিশ সদস্যদের সাথে থাকা সরকারী অস্ত্রগুলিও কাড়িয়া নেওয়ার চেষ্টা করে। বিবাদীদের হামলায় বাদীর সঙ্গীয় ট্রাফিক কং/২২৮৯৭ সিরাজ এবং এসআই/উৎপল দন্ত অপু সাধারণ ও গুরুত্বর রক্তাক্ত জখম হয়। বাদী গুরুত্বর জখম অবস্থায় রাস্তায় পাশে থাকলে আসামীরা পুনরায় বাদীর উপর হামলা করে । ১ ও ২নং আসামী বাদীকে এলোপাথারীভাবে লাথি দিতে থাকে । ৩নং আসামী ইয়াসিন আরাফাত ভূইয়া বাদীর বুকের উপর উঠে দাড়ায় ও ট্রাফিক বক্স ভাঙ্গা কাঁচ দিয়ে আঘাত করিয়া বাদীর বাম হাতে ও মাথায় গুরুত্বর রক্তাক্ত জখম করে। এজাহার নামীয় আসামীদের মামলার ঘটনার সময় ঘটনাস্থল হইতে গ্রেফতার করা হয় এবং তদন্তেপ্রাপ্ত সন্ধিগ্ধ আসামীদের মামলার তদন্তকালীন সময়ে যথেষ্ট সাক্ষ্য প্রমাণের ভিত্তিতে গ্রেফতার করা হয়। আসামীদের মামলার ঘটনার বিষয়ে প্রাথমিক জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করা হইয়াছে। সময়ের স্বল্পতার কারণে আসামীদের ব্যাপকভাবে জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করা সম্ভব হয় নাই। প্রাথমিক জিজ্ঞাসাবাদে আসামীরা মামলার ঘটনার বিষয়ে একেক সময়ে এককে তথ্য প্রদান করিয়া বিভ্রান্ত সৃষ্টি করে ও কৌশলে সঠিক তথ্য প্রদান করা হইতে বিরত থাকে । এমতাবস্থায় উপরোক্ত আসামীদের ০৭(সাত) দিনের পুলিশ রিমান্ডে আমি ব্যাপক ও ধারাবাহিকভাবে জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করিলে মামলার ঘটনার বিষয়ে আরো ব্যাপক তথ্য সংগ্রহ সহ ঘটনায় জড়িত অজ্ঞাতনামা পলাতক আসামীদের সঠিক নাম ঠিকানা সংগ্রহ সহ তাহাদের অবস্থান নির্নয় পূর্বক গ্রেফতার করা সম্ভব হইবে । এমতাবস্থায় মামলা সুষ্ঠু তদন্তের স্বার্থে আসামীদের ০৭(সাত) দিনের পুলিশ রিমান্ডে পাওয়া একান্ত প্রয়োজন । প্রকাশ থাকে যে, আসামীরা ট্রাফিক পুলিশ বক্স ভাংচুর করার সময় এজাহার নামীয় ১নং আসামী সোহাকুল ইসলাম রনি (৩২) নিজে নিজেই আঘাত পেয়ে সামান্য জখমধ্রাপ্ত তাহাদের প্রাথমিক চিকিৎসা প্রদান করা হইয়াছে (চিকিৎসা ব্যবস্থাপত্র সংযুক্ত)।

অতএব, মহোদয় মামলার সুষ্ঠু তদন্তের স্বার্থে, মামলার ঘটনার বিষয়ে আরো ব্যাপক তথ্য সংগ্রহ সহ জড়িত অজ্ঞাতনামা পলাতক আসামীদের সঠিক নাম ঠিকানা সংগ্রহ সহ তাহাদের অবস্থান নির্ণয় পূর্বক গ্রেফতার করার লক্ষ্যে আসামীদের ০৭ (সাত) দিনের পুলিশ রিমান্ডের আদেশদানে মর্জি হয় ।

তারিখ-০৮/০৬/২০২২ইং ।
বিনীত
স্বাঃ অস্পষ্ট
০৮/০৬/২০২২
বিপি-৭৭০৮১১৯৮৭০
পুলিশ পরিদর্শক (অপারেশন) ।”
20. From the above, it reveals that specific allegations have been brought against the accused persons. At this stage there is no scope to adjudicate the falsity or truth of the said allegations. It is true that an advocate is the integral part of the judiciary. However, it does not mean that an advocate is above the law and immune from any criminal proceedings.

21. In view of Article 51 of the constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, only the President of the Republic shall not be answerable in any court for anything done or omitted by him in the exercise or purported exercise of the functions of his office.

22. It appears from the Rule issuing order that the High Court Division having considered the ground No. 6 of the writ petition issued the Rule. The said ground No. 6 is as follows:

"For that the in police custody and subsequent action of the respondent No. 6 clearly reflects that there will be no free and impartial investigation and the victim community will never brought to justice therefore such an incidents will deteriorate the confidents of public upon Law enforcing agencies and their constitutional right to life and protection in respect of investigation and trial enumerated under article 32 and 35(5) of the Constitutions of the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh and life will be trampled and as such the detune should brought before this Hon'ble Court without further delay and release them with any condition."
(underlines supplied)
23. The above ground taken in the Writ Petition is nothing but the writ petitioner has made allegation against a Judicial Officer who passed the impugned order. A Judicial Officer has every right to pass any order within the ambit of law and if, anyone is aggrieved by the same he has legal remedy before the Higher Court in appropriate forum. But, the manner the writ petitioner brought unfounded allegation against the concerned Magistrate, writ respondent No. 6, is highly objectionable. During investigation of a case there is no scope to come to a definite conclusion that an accused is to be harassed and humiliated on mere apprehension and surmises.

24. In the facts and circumstances of the present case as well as the materials on record, we are of the view that no public importance or interest is involved in the writ petition and same has filed on misconception of law and fact. The High Court Division has proceeded with the matter in a wrong way and thus, issued the Rule and passed the ad-interim order erroneously.

25. Having considered as above we have no hesitation to hold that writ petition is not maintainable.

26. Thus, the leave petition is disposed of.

27. The Rule issued in writ petition No. 7045 of 2022 is hereby discharged.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 89===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 2771 of 2018

Decided On: 25.04.2022

Md. Sanaullah
... Vs. ...
Government of Bangladesh and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin, M. Enayetur Rahim and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Mohammad Bakiruddin Bhuiyan, Advocate instructed by Md. Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Chowdhury Mousumee Fatema, Advocate instructed by Nahid Sultana, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Employment Laws, Administrative Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1980 - Section 4(2); Public Servants (retirement) Act, 1974 - Section 10

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated the 21.03.2018 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in A.A.T. Appeal No. 202 of 2015 in A.T. Case No. 02 of 2014

Decision:
Disposed of

ORDER
M. Enayetur Rahim, J.

1. Delay in filing the leave petition is condoned.

2. This Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal at the instance of the defendant-Appellants is directed against the judgment and order dated 21.03.2018 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in A.A.T. Appeal No. 202 of 2015 allowing the appeal and thereby setting aside the judgment and order dated 21.06.2015 passed by the Administrative Tribunal, Chattogram in A.T. Case No. 02 of 2014 allowing the case.

3. The relevant facts, leading to the filing of this leave petition, in brief are as follows;

The petitioner filed A T Case No. 02 of 2014 under section 4(2) of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1980 in the Administrative Tribunal, Chattrogram. It is the case of the petitioner that he was a service holder of the People's Republic of Bangladesh under the Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and Information Technology. Since the appointment to till retirement, he had served his duties most honestly and sincerely to the entire satisfaction to his superiors and during 31 years of his service there was no black spot, and that he did neither commit any professional misconduct nor committed any offence at any time which may cause him any punishment. After retirement when he demanded all his pension from his department on 22.05.2013, unfortunately the respondent No. 3 passed an order on 21.08.2013 stopping to pay the pension to the petition on the plea that

‘বিভাগীয় বাসা এবং জায়গা জমিতে কোন কর্মচারী বসবাস বা দখলে রাখিলে তা কর্মচারী কর্তৃক সংশ্লিষ্ট কর্তৃপক্ষের নিকট বুঝিয়ে না দেওয়া পর্যন্ত পেনশন মঞ্জুরীর কোন বিধান নাই।”
4. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the aforesaid order dated 21.08.2013 the petitioner preferred a departmental appeal before the Managing Director, Bangladesh Tele Communication Ltd. (BTCL) Central Office, on 10.10.2013 but there is no result. Hence, he filed the case.

5. The respondent Nos. 3 and 4 contested the case by filing written objection. The material case of these respondents was that the petitioner occupied the land of BTCL and he used to live there by making house long time and also the Government is entitled to get Tk. 34,709.00 from him for the purpose of selling the telephone calls. The authority allowed the application of the petitioner for twelve months retirement leave from 01.06.2011-31.05.2012 and paid him to arrear money for twelve months retirement leave with provident fund. But the authority ordered the petitioner for shifting his house from the land of BTCL but he did not care and illegally kept the possession of the said land and as such the A.T. Case No. 02 of 2014 is liable to be dismissed.

6. The Administrative Tribunal, Chattogram by its judgment and order dated 21.06.2015 allowed the A.T. Case holding to the effect that the impugned order dated 21.08.2013 passed by the respondent No. 3 is illegal and void.

7. Against the said judgment and order the respondents preferred an appeal being A.A.T. Appeal No. 202 of 2015 before the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka and the Appellate Tribunal after hearing the said appeal allowed the same and set aside the judgment and order dated 21.06.2015 passed by the Administrative Tribunal.

8. Feeling aggrieved by the same the petitioner has preferred this leave petition.

9. Mr. Md. Bakiruddin Bhuiyan, learned Advocate, appearing for the petitioner submits that the Administrative Appellate Tribunal committed serious error in setting aside judgment passed by the Administrative Tribunal without considering the facts that the respondent No. 3 passed the order on 21.08.2013 without any show cause notice and without mentioning any provisions of law and hence ultimate departmental action there under was quite illegal.

10. He further submits that the departmental order dated 21.08.2013 against the petitioner was passed without supporting documents and there is no proofable evidence on record and thus, the Tribunal has opined that the allegations against the petitioner is false, concocted and fabricated one and those were not proved against the petitioner by any legal evidence and the order imposed by the respondent No. 3 against the petitioner is bad in law, but the Administrative Appellate Tribunal proceeded in the matter in a wrong way and as such the impugned order is liable to be set aside.

11. However, Ms. Chowdhury Mousumee Fatema, learned Advocate, appearing for the respondent Nos. 2-4 has supported the impugned judgment passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal.

12. We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the judgment of the Administrative Tribunal as well as the Administrative Appellate Tribunal and other documents as placed before us.

13. It is the case of the respondents that they have stopped the pension to the petitioner as he occupied some land of the respondents organization i.e., BTCL and the respondents are entitled to get Tk. 34,709.00 from the petitioner.

14. On this issue the Tribunal on consideration of the materials placed before it has observed that-

“১ম পক্ষের দাবী ও যুক্তি এই যে, কথিত ঘর ২য় পক্ষ প্রতিষ্ঠানের স্বত্ত্ব দখলীয় সম্পত্তির উপর প্রতিষ্ঠিত নহে । বরং এতদসংক্রান্ত রাঙামাটি জেলার যুগ জেলা জজ আদালতে ৩২৫/১৪ নং একটি দেওয়ানী অপর মামলা বিচারাধীন রহিয়াছেন। ১ম পক্ষের আরো যুক্তি এই যে, টেলিফোন কল বিক্রি বাবদ ৩৪,৭০৯ টাকা পাওনার বিষয়টি বাস্তবতা বিবর্জিত, কাল্পনিক ও মিথ্যা । প্রার্থী কখনো কোন অঙ্গীকারনামা প্রদান করে নাই এবং ২য় পক্ষের বরাদ্দকৃত কোন বাসায় বসবাস করেন না।........।

প্রথম পক্ষের দাখিলী এই অঙ্গীকারনামা ১ম পক্ষের এডমিশন হিসাবে গণ্য করা হইলে Law of estoppels দ্বারা এতদসংক্রান্ত (সম্পত্তির মালিকানা ও দখল) ১ম পক্ষের দাবী আইন বহিভূত গণ্য হইবে। কিন্তু বিষয়টি নিষ্পত্তি ও আলোচনা পূর্বক সিদ্ধান্ত প্রদানের সম্পূর্ণ এখতিয়ার দেওয়ানী আদালতের । এই বিষয়ে ইতোমধ্যে রাঙামাটি জেলার যুগ জেলা জজ আদালতে ৩২৫/১৪ নং দেওয়ানী মামলা থাকার তথ্য বিচারাধীন রহিয়াছে। দ্বিতীয়ত: ১ম পক্ষের নিকট ২য় পক্ষের ৩৪,৯০৭ টাকা বকেয়া পাওনা সংক্রান্ত বিষয়টি দালিলিক ভাবে প্রমাণের দায়িতৃ ২য় পক্ষের । কিন্তু ২য় পক্ষ গ্রহণযোগ্য কোন প্রমাণপত্র দ্বারা এই পাওনার বিষয়টি প্রমাণে সক্ষম না হওয়ায় কেবলমাত্র এই অজুহাতে পেনশন তথা অবসর গ্রহণ সংক্রান্ত পাওনাদি পরিশোধ না করার কোন আইনগত ভিত্তি পরিলক্ষিত হয় না। ২য় পক্ষ ফিরিস্থি মূলে একটি জমা বিভাগের নির্ধারিত ছকে পূরণকৃত ২য় পক্ষের নামীয় কাগজ দাখিল করেন। কিন্তু এই জমা বিভাগরে কাগজ দ্বারা ১ম পক্ষের অবৈধ দখল প্রমাণ হয় নাই।”
15. However, the Administrative Appellate Tribunal relying on an angikarnama dated 16.06.2013 allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment passed by the Administrative Tribunal.

16. A government officer/employee is entitled to get pension and other retirement benefits after his retirement and such right of pension cannot be taken away on any unreasonable and unfounded plea. On the mere allegation of occupying the land of the respondents by the petitioner is not a ground to stop pension privilege.

17. Section 10 of the Public Servants (Retirement) Act, 1974 runs as follows:

"10. Public Servants not entitled to retirement benefits in certain cases-If any judicial proceedings instituted by the Government or, as the case may be, employer or any departmental proceedings are pending against a public servant at the time of his retirement or, as the case may be, ceasing to be in service, he shall not be entitled to any pension or other retirement benefits, except his subscriptions to any provident fund and the interest thereon, till the determination of such proceedings, and the payment to him of any pension or other retirement benefits shall be subject to the findings in such proceedings."
18. If we analyse the above provision of law, then it would be clear that authority may withhold or stopped the pension or other retirement benefits if there is any judicial proceedings, initiated by the government or as the case may be or departmental proceedings is pending against a public servant at the time of his retirement subject to the finding of the said proceedings after determination of the proceedings.

19. In the case of Air Marshal Jamaluddin Ahmed (Retd) vs. Government of Bangladesh and others, reported in 57 DLR 1, a Division Bench of the High Court Division held that:

"On a plain reading of the above provision it would appear that in order to bring a public servant within the mischief of section 10, the Government has to show that a judicial proceeding or a departmental proceeding was pending at the time of his retirement."
20. Chapter XVII of Bangladesh Service Rules, Part-1 deals with pension.

21. Rule 246 of the above Rules contemplated that-

"Future good conduct is an implied condition of every grant of a pension. Government reserves to themselves the right of withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, if the pensioner be convicted of serious crime or be guilty of grave misconduct."
(under lines supplied).
22. Rule 247 of the above Rules is as follows:-

"The president reserves to himself the right to order the recovery from the pension of an officer who entered service on or after 23rd February, 1939 of any amount on account of losses found in judicial or departmental proceedings to have been caused to Government by the negligence or fraud of such officer during his service:

Provided that-

(1) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was on duty,-
(i) shall not be instituted save with sanction of the president;
(ii) shall be instituted before the officer's retirement from service or within a year from the date on which he was last on duty which- ever is later;
(iii) shall be in respect of an event which took place not more than one year before the date on which the officer was last on duty; and
(iv) shall be conducted by such authority and in such places whether in Bangladesh or elsewhere, as the president may direct;

(2) all such departmental proceedings shall be conducted, if the officer concerned so requests in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings on which an order of dismissal from service may be made; and

(3) such judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was on duty, shall have been instituted in accordance with sub-clauses (ii) and (iii) of clause (1).
23. Rule 249 also speaks that-

"No pension may be granted to an officer dismissed or removed of misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency; but to officers so dismissed or removed compassionate allowances may be granted when they are deserving of special consideration; provided that the allowance granted to any officer shall not exceed two-thirds of the pension which would have been admissible to him if he had retired on medical certificate."
24. In the instant case the petitioner neither convicted nor found guilty of grave misconduct by any competent authority during his entire 31 years service period. In the instant case there was no judicial or departmental proceedings pending against the petitioner at the time of his retirement; even no proceedings either judicial or department had been initiated against him within a year of his retirement. Thus, the action taken by the authority stopping the pay of the pension to the petitioner has no legal basis. The respondents have failed to show us that the impugned action has been taken within the ambit of the above provisions of law or any other relevant law.

25. Having considered and discussed as above, we are of the opinion that the Administrative Appellate Tribunal in passing the impugned judgment considered some irrelevant and unfounded issues, rather than the legal aspect and as such the impugned judgment cannot be sustained and same is liable to be interfered.

26. Accordingly, the leave petition is disposed of.

27. Judgment and order dated 21.03.2018 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in A.A.T. Appeal No. 202 of 2015 allowing the appeal is set aside and the judgment and order dated 21.06.2015 passed by the Administrative Tribunal, Chattogram in A.T. Case No. 02 of 2014 is maintained.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 74===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 1462 and 2374 of 2020

Decided On: 14.03.2022

The Government of Bangladesh and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Confidence Cement Limited and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sk. Md. Morshed, Additional Deputy Attorney General, Sumendra Nath Biswas, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Rokanuddin Mahmud, Senior Advocate and Abdul Hannan, Advocate instructed by Syed Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Indirect Taxation

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 104, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 65(1); Customs Act, 1969 - Section 219B

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.08.2019 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3155 and 2989 of 2019

Decision:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Md. Nuruzzaman, J.

1. Delay in filing of both the civil petition for leave to appeal is hereby condoned.

2. These 2(two) Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal are directed against the judgment and order dated 28.08.2019 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos. 2989 and 3155 of 2019 making the Rules absolute and declaring the impugned Memo No. 08.01.0000. 068.20.001. 16/373 dated 29.11.2018 issued by the writ respondent No. 4 purportedly misinterpreting Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 and thereby treating the writ petitioners' supply as not "deemed export" (Annexure-F to the Writ Petition No. 3155 of 2019) including refusal by the writ respondent No. 5 to allow input output co-efficient in favour of the writ petitioners vide Nathi Nos. 1(Uma)Dedo/Shohag/2018/496/764, 1(Uma) Dedo/Shohag/2017/80772 and Nathi No. 1(Uma)/Dedo/Shohag/2018/539/771 all dated 24.01.2019 (Annexure-H-H(2) respectively of Writ Petition No. 3155 of 2019) including making demand of VAT with show cause notice under section 55(1) of the VAT Act, 1991 vide Nathi No. 4th/A(12)13/Mushak Parihar/Confidence Cement/SoiDa/2019/584 dated 12.02.2019 (Annexure-H of Writ Petition No. 2989 of 2019) to have been issued without lawful authority and hence, are of no legal effect.

3. These 2(two) civil petitions for leave to appeal since involved the similar and identical question of law having similar formulated questions, are heard together and they are dealt with by this single judgment.

4. The facts relevant for disposal of both the civil petitions for leave to appeal are that the Confidence Cement Limited is the writ petitioner-the Writ Petition No. 2989 of 2019 is a private limited companies duly incorporated under the Company Act, 1994, manufacturer of cement and supply the same in the local market as well as exports in foreign market. It also supplies cement to the foreign entities who have acted as project contractor under the Government getting work order of international tender published in the respective national newspapers, under letter of credit against foreign currency. In compliance thereof the writ petitioner No. 1 submitted "challan" in "Form Musul-11" as well as PRC so had been issued by the respective negotiating banks. During the relevant period, the writ petitioner No. 1 also submitted monthly VAT return under "Form Musuk-19" from December, 2017 to December, 2018 wherein at serial No. 2, the quantum of "deemed export" had been shown in U.S. dollar against the goods supplied at 0% VAT, which the authority concerned duly acknowledged and approved without raising any objections whatsoever. However, after issuance of the impugned explanation dated 29.11.2018 and pursuant to the directions so contained therein the writ respondent No. 1 also issued notice of demand of VAT with show cause thereof upon the writ petitioner No. 1 under section 55(1) of the Vat Act, 1991 on 12.02.2019 for the period of December, 2017 to December, 2018.

5. The writ-petitioners filed the Writ Petition No.3155 of 2019 before the High Court Division challenging the Nathi No.08.01.0000. 068.20.001.16/373 dated 29-11-2018 issued by the writ respondent No.4 purportedly misinterpreting the Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 and thereby treating the petitioners' supply as not "deem export" and refusal by the writ respondent No.5 to allow input output co-efficient in favour of the writ-petitioners vide Nathi No . 1(Uma)Dedo/Shohag/2018/496/ 764, Nathi No.1(Uma)Dedo/Shohag/2017/80/ 772, Nathi No.1(Uma)Dedo/Shohag/2018/ 539/771 all dated 24-1-2019 stating that at the time of issuance of Rule Nisi in Writ Petition No.3I55 of 2019 there was direction upon the Writ respondents concern to receive and return "57M-S" and "mer--o" under rule 27(2) of the VAT Rules, 1991 in support of the sale of products of the writ-petitioners under "deemed export" scheme in respect of Contract No.PGCB/JICA/BP-P70/76 of Hathazari-Sikalbala 230KV and Hathazari-Rampur 230KV, Contract No.PGLB/400KV/PAT-GOP/TL of Patuakhali (Payra) Gopalgonj 400KV, Contract No.PGCB/23DKV/PP/TL of Patuakhali-Payra 230KV and Contract No.PGCB/132KV /BKG-BGN/TL of Bakergonj -Borgona 132KV respectively, all in connection with transmission line projects. The writ-petitioner Nos.1 and 2 are the private limited companies duly incorporated under the Company Act, 1994 who manufactured different steel products which are being used in electricity transmission line under electrical sector. Those two companies are registered with the Board of Investment as well as the VAT authority as supplier (Mgf), service renderer, importer and exporter of cement. The writ-petitioner No.1, whoever, obtained bond license from the writ respondent No.2 as 100% export oriented industry which is valid upto 16-1-2021. Pursuant to the terms of the said bond license said writ-petitioner imported raw materials from time to time through different Bills of Entry within the limit of allocation. Pursuant to international tenders so published by M/s Power Grid Company of Bangladesh Ltd. (in short, PGCB), an enterprise of Bangladesh Power Development Board, Dhaka on 12-2-2017, 1-9-2016, 2-3-2015 and 12-2-2017 respectively in connection with infrastructural development projects of the Government respective contracts were executed on 25-10-2016 between consortium of Fujikuraq Ltd., ITOCHU Corporation and LS Cable and System Ltd., Japan for Hathazari-Sikalbaha 230KV Transmission and Hathazari-Rampur-230KV transmission line on turnkey basis; on 24-5-2017, with GS Engineering and Construction Corporation, a company of the Republic of Korea for Patuakhali (Payra)-Gopalgonj 400KV transmission line on turnkey basis; with JV of China National Cables Engineering Corporation (CCC) and WUXI hangnail Cable Co. Ltd., China for Patuakhali-Payra 230KV transmission line on turnkey basis; and with HG Power Transmission, Sdn Bhd, Malaysia for Bakergonj-Burguna 132KV transmission line on turnkey basis. Under the said 4(four) contracts so made pursuant to 4(four) international tenders, separate and individual contracts had been executed between consortium of Fujikuraq Ltd. ITOCHU Corporation and LS Cable and System Ltd., Japan and also with GS Engineering and Construction Corporation, Korea and the writ-petitioners respectively for supply of electrical towers as sub-contractor. Before commencing their supply to the respective projects under "deemed export scheme" the writ-petitioner Nos.1 and 2, however, applied before the writ respondent No.2 for approval of input output co-efficient (সহগ) of the imported raw materials from time to time. In response, thereof, the writ respondent No.2 gave approval subject to certain terms and conditions as set forth therein. Consequent thereto several Letters of Credit had been opened by the writ-petitioners against foreign currency. To that effect Export Proceed Realization Certificates (in short, PRC) had also been issued by the concerned negotiating bank. It has been contended that in 2013 after inserting clause (ই) in section 2(শ) of the VAT Act, 1991 (in short, the Act of 1991) vide Finance Act, 2013, an office order was issued by the National Board of Revenue (in short, the NBR) vide Nathi No.5(9)/Shulka Export and Bond/2007/342 dated 4-8-2013 observing, inter-alia, that in view of clause (2) of section 2(শ) of the Act, 1991 if any product had been supplied by the respective bonded warehouse against L/C of foreign currency under any international tender, it would be deemed as export and that said order was published in public interest with immediate effect. Said office order is still in force. However, since 2013 the writ respondents all along treated, classified and allowed the supply of the writ-petitioners as "deemed export" by allowing input output co-efficient (সহগ) from time to time. Later, on 4-11-2018, the Customs, Excise and VAT Commissionerate, Chattogram sought necessary explanation and direction from the NBR in connection with Rule 31 Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991. In response thereof a section of the National Board of Revenue namely "মূসক আইন ও বিধি শাখা” under the signature of Second Secretary, writ respondent No.4 vide Nathi No-8-01.0000.068.20.001.16/ 373 dated 29-11-2018 issued the impugned "স্পষ্টীকরণ ও দিক নির্দেশনা", which is quoted herein below:

“গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার
জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ড
রাজস্ব ভবন
সেগুনবাগিচা, ঢাকা
মূসক আইন ও বিধি শাখা
নথি নং-০৮.০১.০০০০.০৬৮,২০-০০১.১৬/৩৭৩
তারিখঃ ১৫ অগ্রহায়ন, ১৪২৫ বঙ্গাব্দ
২৯ নভেম্বর, ২০১৮ খিস্টাব্দ

বিষয়ঃ মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ ৩১ক এ উল্লিখিত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের বিষয়ে স্পষ্টীকরণ ও দিকনির্দেশনা ।

সুত্রঃ কাস্টমস, এক্সাইজ ও ভ্যাট কমিশনারেট, চট্টগ্রাম এর পত্র নং ৪র্/এ(৫১২)২১/মূসক-উৎপাদন/রপ্তানী/সংদঃ/২০১৮/৪ ৭১৩, তারিখ ৪ নভেম্বর, ২০১৮ খিস্টাব্দ ।

উপর্যুক্ত বিষয় ও সূত্রের প্রতি আপনার দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা হলো।

২। মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এ উন্লিখিত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের ক্ষেত্রে “রপ্তানি” এবং “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য” এ দুটো সংজ্ঞার পরিধি নিয়ে মাঠ পর্যায়ে জটিলতা পরিলক্ষিত হচ্ছে মর্মে জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ডকে অবহিত করা হয়েছে৷

৩। এ সংক্রান্ত বিদ্যমান বিধি-বিধান জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ডে পর্যালোচনা করা হয়েছে। পর্যালোচনান্তে দেখা যায়, মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর মাধ্যমে মূলত বাংলাদেশে নিবন্ধিত কোন উৎপাদক বা সেবা উন্নয়ন সহযোগী, বিদেশী রাষ্ট্র বা সংস্থার সাথে সরকারের সম্পাদিত আন্তর্জাতিক চুক্তি বা সমঝোতা স্মারকের আওতায় খণ, অনুদান বা অন্য কোন চুক্তির অধীন কোন পণ্য, কার্য বা সেবা ক্রয়ের বিপরীতে দরপত্রে অংশগ্রহণের ক্ষেত্রে আন্তর্জাতিক বা বিদেশি প্রতিষ্ঠানের তুলনায় প্রতিযোগিতায় সক্ষমতা (Competitive Edge প্রদান) সৃষ্টি করা হয়েছে। অর্থাৎ, এ বিধির মাধ্যমে দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহ অংশথহণের ক্ষেত্রে পিছিয়ে না পড়ে এবং খণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় প্রাপ্ত বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা যেন বিদেশি প্রতিষ্ঠানের মাধ্যমে পুনরায় দেশের বাহিরে চলে না যায় সে বিষয়টি বিবেচনায় রেখে মূলত দেশিয় প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক সম্পাদিত কার্যক্রমকে রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য করার বিধান রেখে শুল্ক কর প্রণোদনা প্রদান করা হয়েছে। তবে এক্ষেত্রে এ কার্যক্রম “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”বিবেচিত হতে হলে দেশিয় প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক সরাসরি দরপত্র অংশগ্রহণের মাধ্যমে কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্তির বাধ্যবাধকতা রয়েছে।

৪। বৈদেশিক ঝণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় কোন প্রকল্প/কার্য/সেবা সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে আহ্বানকৃত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় কিংবা বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় বাংলাদেশের অভ্যন্তরে কোন পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহের ক্ষেত্রে কেবলমাত্র প্রাথমিকভাবে মনোনীত/কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের ক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩১ক এ বর্ণিত আনুষ্ঠানিকতা পরিপালন সাপেক্ষে পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহের ক্ষেত্রে“রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার সুবিধা প্রাপ্য হবে। উক্ত প্রাথমিকভাবে মনোনীত/কার্ধাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান/কন্ট্রাক্টর কর্তৃক পরবতীতে পত্রিকায় দরপত্র আহ্বানের মাধ্যমে অন্যকোন প্রতিষ্ঠানকে প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে পণ্য/সেবা/কার্য সম্পাদনের সাব-কক্ট্রাক্ট/কার্যাদেশ প্রদান করা হলে উক্ত সাব-কন্ট্রাক্টরকে কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক মূল কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান/কন্ট্রাক্টরকে একই প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহ করা হলে তা বিধি ৩১ক এর আওতায়“রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার কোন আইনগত সুযোগ নেই। এটি বিধিতে যেমন স্পষ্ট করা হয়েছে তেমনি অনুচ্ছেদ-৩ এ উল্লিখিত কারণে তা আলোচ্য বিধি প্রণয়নের মূল চেতনা এর পরিপন্থি । কেননা, এক্ষেত্রে একটি ঋণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় একটি নির্দিষ্ট প্রকল্প সম্পাদনে বাংলাদেশ সরকার একবারই বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা প্রাপ্ত হয় এবং সে কারণে প্রকল্প বাস্তবায়নকারী সংস্থা কর্তৃক প্রাথমিকভাবে আহ্বানকৃত আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত মূল দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানকে রপ্তানি সুবিধা প্রদান করা হয়। পরবতীতে আহ্বানকৃত আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত মূল দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানকে রপ্তানি সুবিধা প্রদান করা হয়। পরবর্তীতে উক্ত মুল কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক যদি একই প্রকল্পে পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহের লক্ষ্যে পুনরায় পত্রিকায় দরপত্র বিজ্ঞপ্তি আহ্বান করে কোন দ্বিতীয় পক্ষকে সাব-কন্ট্রাক্টর নিয়োগ করা হয় অথবা পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহের কার্যাদেশ প্রদান করা হয় সেক্ষেত্রে যেহেতু নতুন করে বাংলাদেশ সরকার কোন বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা প্রাপ্ত হয় না, সেহেতু পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহ দ্বিতীয়বার “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার কোন আইনগত সুযোগ নেই। প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের জন্য যে স্বত্বার সাথে প্রাথমিক চুক্তি সম্পাদিত হয় শুধুমাত্র এ স্বত্বার জন্য পণ্য বা সেবার সরবরাহ বা কার্যসম্পাদন রপ্তানি বলে গণ্য অন্যকোন সরবরাহকারী এক্ষেত্রে বিবেচনার সুযোগ নেই। কারণ এক্ষেত্রে প্রকল্প/চুক্তি সম্পাদনে মুল কার্যাদেশপ্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠানের কার্যক্রম “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ায় সরবরাহ চেইনে পরিশোধিত পূর্ববর্তী শুক্ক-কর প্রত্যর্পণ প্রদান করার বিধান করা হয়েছে । তাই, প্রকল্প সম্পাদনে, প্রাথমিকভাবে চুক্তিবদ্ধ স্বত্ত্বা “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য” কার্যক্রম করে বিধায় এ সুবিধা প্রাপ্ত হবে, অন্যকেউ নয়।

৫। এছাড়া, পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট আইন, ২০০৬ এর ধারা ৩ এর দফা (ঘ) অনুযায়ী কোন উন্নয়ন সহযোগী, বিদেশী রাষ্ট্র বা সংস্থার সহিত সরকারের সম্পাদিত কোন ঋণ, অনুদান বা অন্য কোন চুক্তির অধীন কোন পণ্য, কার্য বা সেবা ক্রয়ের ক্ষেত্রে পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট আইন, ২০০৬ এবং পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট রুল, ২০০৮ এর বিধান পরিপালন বাধ্যতামূলক । অর্থাৎ মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর আওতায় পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহ কার্যক্রম “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হতে হলে যে কোন স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্র কার্যক্রম পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট ক্লুল, ২০০৮ এর বিধান মোতাবেক সংঘটিত হওয়ার আইনি বাধ্যবাধকতা রয়েছে। কোন সংস্থা বা প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট রুল, ২০০৮ অনুসরণপূর্বক দরপত্র কার্যক্রম সম্পন্ন না করলে সেক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩১ক এ উল্লিখিত রপ্তানি সংশ্লিষ্ট সুবিধাদি প্রযোজ্য হবে না।

৬। সম্প্রতি কিছু কিছু প্রতিষ্ঠান মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর অপব্যবহার করে রাজস্ব ফাকি দিচ্ছে মর্মে জাতীয় রাজত্ব বোর্ডের গোচরীভূত হয়েছে। তাই এ জাতীয় প্রতিষ্ঠানের কার্যক্রম নিবিড় মনিটরিং করে প্রয়োজনে নিরীক্ষা কার্যক্রম সম্পাদনের মাধ্যমে আইনানুগ রাজত্ব আদায় করার জন্য সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলকে নির্দেশক্রমে অনুরোধ করা হলো । বর্ণিতাবস্থায়, উপরোক্ত নির্দেশনা মোতাবেক যথাযথ আইনানুগ পদক্ষেপ গ্রহণের জন্য সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলকে নির্দেশ প্রদান করা হলো।

স্বাক্ষর
(মোঃ তারেক হাসান)
দ্বিতীয় সচিব (মুসক আইন ও বিধি)”
6. Pursuant to the said directions as contained in the impugned Nathi dated 29.11.2018 the writ respondent No. 5 had refused to entertain the applications made by the writ petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 for approval of input output co-efficient vide Nathi Nos. 1(Uma) Dedo/Shohag/2018/496/764, 1(Uma)Dedo/Shohag/2017/80/772 and Nathi No. 1(Uma) Dedo/Shohag/2018/539/771 all dated 24.01.2019. Under the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the writ petitioners, finding no other alternative efficacious remedy, filed the above noted writ petitions before the High Court Division and obtained the Rules Nisi.

7. The writ respondent No. 3 contested the said Rule Nisi by filing an affidavit-in-opposition in Writ Petition No. 3155 of 2019.

8. In due course, after hearing the parties and considering the connected papers on record, a Division Bench of the High Court Division made the Rules Nisi absolute by the impugned judgment and order dated 28.08.2019.

9. Feeling aggrieved, by the judgment and order dated 28.08.2019 passed in Writ Petition No. 3155 and 2989 of 2019, the Government of Bangladesh and others - writ respondents as petitioners herein filed the instant civil Petitions for leave to appeal.

10. Mr SK. Md Morshed, the learned Additional Attorney-General appearing on behalf of the petitioners in both the petitions submits that the respective agreements were executed between M/s. Power Grid Company of Bangladesh Ltd. (in short, PGCB) and consortium of Fujikura Ltd. ITOCHU Corporation and LS Cable and System Ltd. Subsequently, the writ-petitioners concerned as suppliers entered into an agreement on 21-12-2016 with the said contractors for supplying goods. The writ-petitioners and the procuring entity, i.e., PGCB did not enter into any agreement at any point of time under the international tender process. In this regard, referring to Rule 3lKa(lka) of the VAT Rules, 1991, and in view of the said provision respective project must be funded in foreign currency in the form of grant or loan; that project should be under an international agreement or Memorandum of Articles; the consignee liable to implement the project should be a VAT registered entity in Bangladesh; and that the work order for supply of materials/implementation should be given to the successful bidder who participated in any local or international tender. The person/ organization liable to implement the project is PGCB (বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে প্রকল্পে বাস্তবায়নে দায়িত্বপ্রাপ্ত সংস্থা) who has been granted fund and assigned for implementation of the project in question and that GS Engineering and Construction Corporation, a foreign company being a successful bidder entered into a contract with PGCB bearing Contract No.PGCB/400kv/PAT-GOP/TL) for design, manufacture and supply, installation, testing and commissioning the project. Since the activities of the said foreign company had been done in exchange of foreign currency, hence, its activities may be treated as "export/deemed export" provided it fulfills the pre-condition of being a registered entity under the VAT Act in Bangladesh. Apart from that, the writ-petitioners although are VAT registered companies of Bangladesh but being the sub-contractor of GS Engineering and Construction Corporation have no scope to get the said benefit since it did not sign any contract directly with PGCB but getting its remuneration in foreign currency, which is a part of sum acquired by GS Engineering from PGCB.

11. He further submits that the writ respondent No. 4 has issued the impugned Memo explaining the legal aspects as contained in Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 but the writ petitioners by filing the instant writ petitions have intended to misinterpret the said provision of law to suit its own sweet will in order to avail duty drawback paid in connection with the input output co-efficient in the guise of "deemed export" which is malafide. He next submits that the writ respondent No. 3, National Board of Revenue, has statutory power conferred under section 219B of the Customs Act, 1969 read with section 72 of the VAT Act, 1991 to issue Rules, orders and notices, explanations or circulars in any matter for the purpose of implementation/execution of the Act provided that those are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or the Rules so framed thereunder. At the same time, Rule 38 of the VAT Rules so framed thereunder. In addition, Rule 38 of the VAT Rules, 1991 has also provided power to the Board, the Commissioners or the Director Generals to issue explanations, orders clarify the disputes emendated therefrom. Moreover, the Director General of the concerned Department of NBR has power to determine input-output coefficient pursuant to section 13(3) of the VAT Act, 1991 and to grant drawback to the exporter on the duties and taxes paid on inputs used in the manufacturing of exported/deemed exported goods on that basis. Hence, the impugned orders issued by the writ respondent No. 5 regretting to approve input-output coefficient prior to granting drawback is lawful. He also submits that the writ petitioners submitted monthly return in statutory form "Mushak-19" stating its activities thereon. However, its monthly returns were duly accepted on being satisfied by the authority since no objection as to taking rebate by the writ petitioners was raised. But fact remains that section 26Ka(6) of the VAT Act, 1991 has put no bar on re-investigation or re-audit of the activities of any tax payer on reasonable ground even though it has been audited or investigated earlier. Hence, the writ petitioners cannot be absolved from any subsequent demand on the plea that the returns were submitted and those had been accepted without any instant objection whatsoever. In that view of the matter, the impugned Nathi dated 29.11.2018 issued by the writ respondent No. 4 providing explanation of Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 and thereby subsequent refusal to allow input-output co-efficient in favour of the writ petitioners as well as demand of VAT under section 55(1) of the Act of 1991 cannot be mandated as unlawful.

12. He finally submits that Article 65(1) of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh provides that nothing shall prevent the Parliament from delegating its power to make orders, rules or other enactments having legislative effect. However, it is the established principle of law that the Legislature is not always required to legislate in its entirely to carry out all its work. Some of its functions is left out to be performed fully by persons technically conversant with the levy and realization thereof, or else the legislative scheme as to levy and realization may be frustrated but the High Court Division committed serious illegality in making the Rules Nisi absolute and, as such, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

13. Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents in Civil Petition No.1462 of 2020 and respondents in Civil Petition No.1462 of 2020 and respondent Nos. I and 2 in Civil Petition No.2374 of 2020 made submissions in support of the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division. He submits that from a plain reading of those provisions of law and the impugned Nathi dated 29-11-2018 it becomes apparent that neither the writ respondent No.3 nor writ respondent No.4 has been authorized or delegated with the authority to give periphery (পরিধি) of the definition of the word "রপ্তানি" as defined in section 2(ঘ) " রপ্তানি বলিয়া গণ্য” as defined in section 2(শ) of the Act nor under any other provisions of the VAT Act or the Rules so framed thereunder. In this regard, vide section 2(শ)clause (আ) and (ই) the words "বিধি দ্বারা নির্ধারিত পদ্ধতিতে" have been incorporated, which are to be read along with section 72(2) of the VAT Act empowering the NBR to frame Rules. In exercise of the said power the NBR has inserted/ incorporated Rule 31 Ka in "মূল্য সংযোজন বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১” vide SRO No.305-আইন/2004/433-Mushuk dated 21-10-2004 regarding method/procedure as to indentifying the supply as "deemed export". Later, by making amendment of Rule 31 Ka, sub-rule (1Ka) has been inserted vide SRO No.05- Ain/2013/694-Mushak dated 2-1-2014 by adding (1Ka) including the word 'ব্যাখ্যা' by adding "বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্র" after the words "স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্র". Rule 31Ka does not confer any jurisdiction 'স্ব স্ব এখতিয়ার ভুক্ত বিষয়' to be read along with Rule 38 of the VAT Rules, 1991. The Rule 31Ka(lka) being clear in terms, hence, the writ respondent concern does not require any clarification or direction in the name of "স্পষ্টীকরণ ও দিক নির্দেশনা", as has been done vide the impugned Nathi dated 29-11-2018. From careful perusal of the contents of the impugned Nathi it is apparent that the writ respondent No.4 has substantially deviated from the provisions of sections 2(শ)(ই)and 3(2)(Ka) of the VAT Act, 1991 read with Rule 2 (ঙঙঙঙ) and Rule 31Ka (1Ka)(4) (ব্যাখ্যা) of the VAT Rules, 1991 as well as the office order dated 4-8-2013 issued earlier by the NBR of the Writ Petition No.3155 of 2019. In this connection referring to the first sentence of paragraph 4 in particular "কেবলমাত্র প্রাথমিকভাবে মনোনীত/কার্যাদেশপ্রাপ্ত দেশীয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের ক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩১ক এ বর্ণিত আনুষ্ঠানিক পরিপালক সাপেক্ষে পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহের ক্ষেত্রে ‘রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য’ হওয়ার সুবিধা প্রাপ্য হবে।” and, as such, the High Court Division rightly made the Rules Nisi absolute and passed the impugned judgment. Hence, the instant leave petition may kindly be dismissed.

14. We have considered the submissions of the learned Additional Attorney General for the petitioners and the learned Counsel for the respondents. Perused the impugned judgment of the High Court Division and connected other materials on record.

15. The facts in issue involved in these petitions are that

Whether the writ petitioner companies entered into any agreement with the procuring entity, hence, entitled to get drawbacks under Rule 31A of the Vat Rules, 1991;
Whether the writ respondents possesses the power of delegated legislation in the form of the impugned memo. no. 08.01.0000.068.20.001.16/373; dated 29.11.2018;
Whether re-investigation or re-audit of the activities of any tax payer on reasonable ground even though it has been audited or investigated earlier;
Whether the writ respondent no. 5's regretting to approve input-output coefficient prior to granting drawback is lawful.
16. It is crystal clear from the averments of the very writ petitions that PGCB, the procuring entity entered into contract with the China Communication and Construction Limited (in re writ petition no. 2989 of 2019) and consortium of Fujikura Ltd., ITOCHU Corporation and LS Cable and System Ltd., Japan; GS Engineering and Construction Corporation, South Korea; JV of China National Cables Engineering Corporation (CCC) and WUXI Jiangnan Cable Co. Ltd., China and HG Power Transmission, Snd Bhd, Malaysia for its different projects through some international tender processes. The writ petitioner companies and PGCB never ever entered into any agreement under the concerned international tender process. Rather the writ petitioner companies entered into agreements with the China Communication and Construction Limited (in re writ petition no. 2989 of 2019) and consortium of Fujikura Ltd., ITOCHU Corporation and LS Cable and System Ltd., Japan; GS Engineering and Construction Corporation, South Korea; JV of China National Cables Engineering Corporation (CCC) and WUXI Jiangnan Cable Co. Ltd., China and HG Power Transmission, Snd Bhd, Malaysia (in re writ petition no. 3155 of 2019) as supplying goods which are subcontracts in nature. To avail the fruits of Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 relevant scheme must be funded in foreign currency in the form of grant or loan; that project should be under an international agreement or Memorandum of Articles; the consignee liable to implement the project should be a VAT registered entity in Bangladesh and that the work order for supply of materials/implementation should be given to the winning bidder who participated in any local or international tender.

17. The concerned rule 31A of the VAT Rules 1991 is as such-

“৩১ক । স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদান ।-

(১) আন্তর্জাতিক চুক্তি বা সমঝোতা স্মারকের আওতায় বাংলাদেশের অভ্যন্তরে কোনো স্থাপনা বা অবকাঠামো নির্মাণ, সুষমকরণ, সম্প্রসারণ, আধুনিকায়ন বা বাংলাদেশের কোনো জনগোষ্ঠীর মধ্যে কোনো পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের অভিপ্রায়ে উপর্যুক্ত কার্যাবলির সহযোগিতার লক্ষ্যে অনুদান বা ঋণ হিসেবে প্রদত্ত বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে প্রকল্প বাস্তবায়নে দায়িত্প্রাপ্ত সংস্থা বা ব্যক্তি কর্তৃক বাংলাদেশে নিবন্ধিত কোনো উৎপাদক বা সেবা প্রদাননকারীর নিকট হইতে স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের মাধ্যমে কোনো পণ্য বা সেবা ক্রয় করা হইলে নিম্নবর্ণিত শর্তে উহা আইনের ধারা ৩ এর উপ-ধারা (২)(ক) এর অধীন রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য হইবে, যথা:

(ক) বাংলাদেশ সরকার বা সরকারের নিকট হইতে ক্ষমতাপ্রাপ্ত ব্যক্তি বা প্রতিষ্ঠানের সহিত অনুদান বা খণ সংক্রান্ত বিষয়ে দাতা সংস্থার আন্তর্জাতিক চুক্তি বা সমঝোতা স্মারক থাকিতে হইবে;

(খ) স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রে উক্ত চুক্তি বা স্থানীয়ভাবে সংগৃহীত পণ্য বা সেবা ব্যবহারের বিষয়টি উল্লেখ করিতে হইবে; এবং

(গ) দরপত্রের মাধ্যমে নির্বাচিত পণ্য সরবরাহকারী বা সেবা প্রদানকারী সংশ্লিষ্ট আন্তর্জাতিক চুক্তি বা সমঝোতা স্মারকের সত্যয়িত কপি, দরপত্র বিজ্ঞপ্তি ও সরবরাহ আদেশ বা, প্রযোজ্য ক্ষেত্রে, ক্রয় আদেশের কপিসহ স্থানীয় মূল্য সংযোজন কর কর্তৃপক্ষকে অবহিত করিতে হইবে ।

(২) যে নিবন্ধিত ব্যক্তির ক্ষেত্রে আইনের ধারা ৩৫ অনুযায়ী দাখিলপত্র প্রদানের বাধ্যবাধকতা রহিয়াছে তিনি তথ্কর্তৃক স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে সরবরাহকৃত পণ্য বা প্রদত্ত সেবায় ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের ক্ষেত্রে কর প্রত্যর্পণ গ্রহণ করিতে চাহিলে তাহার ক্ষেত্রে বিধি ২৯-এর সংশ্লিষ্ট বিধানাবলি প্রযোজ্য হইবে ।

(৩) যে নিবন্ধিত ব্যক্তির ক্ষেত্রে উপ-বিধি (২) এ বর্ণিত বাধ্যবাধকতা প্রযোজ্য নহে তিনি তথকর্তৃক স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে সরবরাহকৃত পণ্য বা প্রদত্ত সেবায় ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের ক্ষেত্রে কর প্রত্যর্পণ গ্রহণ চাহিলে তাঁহার ক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩০-এর সংশ্লিষ্ট বিধানাবলি প্রযোজ্য হইবে।

(৪) উপ-বিধি (২) ও (৩) এ বর্ণিত ক্ষেত্রে যথাক্রমে দাখিলপত্র ও আবেদনপত্রের সহিত সংশ্লিষ্ট দরপত্রের অনুলিপি, দরপত্র গ্রহণের প্রমাণপত্র, কার্যসম্পাদনের নির্দেশনামা এবং বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় মূল্য প্রাপ্তির প্রমাণপত্র সংযুক্ত করিতে হইবে।

ব্যাখ্যা ।__এই বিধির উদ্দেশ্য পুরণকল্পে “স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জীতিক” দরপত্র বলিতে বাংলাদেশে প্রকাশিক জাতীয় দৈনিক পত্রিকা বা বাংলাদেশের বাহিরে প্রকাশিত আন্তর্জাতিকমানের পত্রিকায় আহ্বানকৃত দরপত্র বিজ্ঞপ্তি (Tender Notice) কে বুঝাইবে |”
18. Consequently, the goods supplied by the writ petitioner companies as sub-contractors cannot be assessed as "deemed export" under the rules concerned.

19. The companies legally responsible to execute the ventures are the aforementioned foreign companies being successful bidders entered into contracts with PGCB for design, manufacture and supply, installation, testing and commissioning etc of the projects. As the activities of the company had been done in exchange of foreign currency, consequently, its activities may be treated as "export/deemed export" if fulfills the pre-condition of being registered entities under the VAT Act in Bangladesh not the writ petitioner companies as they are sub-contractors only. Subcontractors are not eligible to get drawbacks under rule 31A of the VAT Rules, 1991.

20. In addition, section 13(3) of the VAT Act, 1991 states that-

‘(৩) “মহাপরিচালক, শুল্ক রেয়াত ও প্রত্যর্পণ পরিদপ্তর”, সরকারী গেজেটে জারীকৃত আদেশ দ্বারা, কোন রপ্তানিকারককে প্রকৃত রপ্তানির বিপরীতে চালানভিত্তিক বা, ক্ষেত্রমত, রপ্তানি পণ্যের উপকরণ-উৎপাদ সহগ (input-output co-efficient) এর ভিত্তিতে সমহার (flat rate) এ রপ্তানিকৃত পণ্যে ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের উপর পরিশোধিত পরিমাণ উপ-ধারা (১) উল্লিখিত শুল্ক ও করসমূহ প্রত্যর্পণের নির্দেশ প্রদান করিতে পারিবেন ।”
21. Thus it is clear that the concerned Department of NBR has power to conclude input-output co-efficient pursuant to and to grant drawback to the exporter on the duties and taxes paid on inputs used in the manufacturing of exported/deemed exported goods on that basis. For this reason, the impugned orders issued by the writ respondent no. 5 regretting to approve input-output coefficient prior to granting drawback is lawful.

22. Another writ respondent, National Board of Revenue, has statutory power conferred under section 219B of the Customs Act, 1969 read with section 72 of the VAT Act, 1991 to issue Rules, orders and notices, explanations or circulars in any matter for the purpose of implementation/execution of the Act provided that those are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or the Rules so framed thereunder. At the same time, Rule 38 of the VAT Rules, 1991 has also provided power to the Board, the Commissioners or the Director Generals to issue explanations, orders clarify the disputes emendated therefrom.

23. Section 219B of the Customs Act, 1969 is as follows-

"Power to issue Orders, Notices, Explanations or Circulars

219B. The Board or, as the case may be, the Commissioner of Customs (Bond), or Commissioner of Customs (Valuation and internal audit), or any other Commissioner of Customs or any Director General may issue orders, notices, explanations or circulars within their respective jurisdiction not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder."
24. Section 72 of VAT Act, 1991 is as follows-

“৭২। বিধি প্রণয়নের ক্ষমতা ।_(১) এই প্রজ্ঞাপন দ্বারা, বিধি প্রণয়ন [এবং প্রণীত বিধির ইংরেজিতে অনূদিত একটি নির্ভরযোগ্য পাঠ (Authentic English text) প্রকাশ] করিতে পারিবে [:

তবে শর্ত থাকে যে, বাংলা পাঠ ও ইংরেজি পাঠের মধ্যে বিরোধের ক্ষেত্রে বাংলা পাঠ প্রাধান্য পাইবে ।]

(২) বিশেষ করিয়া এবং উপরি-উক্ত ক্ষমতার সামর্থিকতাকে ক্ষুণ্ন না করিয়া, অনুরূপ বিধিতে নিন্নবর্ণিত সকল অথবা যে কোন বিষয়ে বিধান করা যাইবে, যথা:-
(ক) মূল্য সংযোজন কর বা, ক্ষেত্রমত, মূল্য সংযোজন কর ও সম্পূরক শুল্ক নিরূপণ, ধার্যকরণ ও আদায়করণ এবং উক্তরূপ ধার্যের জন্য মূল্য নির্ধারণ, মূল্য ঘোষণা ও ঘোষিত মুল্য যাচাই বাছাইকরণ প্রক্রিয়া উপকরণ কর রেয়াত গ্রহণ এবং এই আইনের অধীন দায়িত্বসমূহ পালনকারী কর্তৃপক্ষসমূহ নির্ধারণ;
(খ) মূল্য সংযোজন কর আরোপযোগ্য পণ্য উহার উৎপাদন বা প্রস্তুতকরণের স্থান বা ব্যবসায় স্থল হইতে অপসারণ ও পরিবহন;
(গ) এই আইনের অধীন কোন বিধির প্রয়োগের তদারকির জন সরকারী কর্মকর্তা নিয়োগ;
(ঘ) করযোগ্য পণ্য, অব্যাহতিপ্রাপ্ত পণ্য এবং উক্তরূপ পণ্যসমূহ প্রস্তুতকরণ বা উৎপাদনে বা সরবরাহে ব্যবহৃত উপকরণসমূহ পণ্য প্রস্তুতকরণ বা উৎপাদনের স্থান বা ব্যবসায় স্থলে পৃথকভাবে রক্ষণ;
(ঙ) করযোগ্য পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানে নিয়োজিত কোন ব্যক্তি কর্তৃক এই আইনের অধীন প্রয়োজনীয় তথ্য সরবরাহ;
(চ) করযোগ্য পণ্য কেবল নির্ধারিত মোড়ক, বলিয়া বা কোষে সরবরাহকরণ এবং যে মোড়ক, থলিয়া বা কোষে উহা সরবরাহ করা হয় তাহাতে উহার খুচরা মূল্য মুদ্রণ, উৎর্কীণকরণ বা বুনন বাধ্যতামূলককরণ;
(ছ) যে কোন পণ্য সম্পর্কে এই আইন বা কোন বিধি লঙ্ঘন করা হয় তাহার বাজেয়াপ্তকরণ;
(জ) প্রস্তুতকরণ বা উৎপাদিত বা আমদানীকৃত, ক্রয়কৃত, অর্জিত বা অন্য কোনভাবে সংগৃহীত পণ্যের] নমুনা সংগ্রহ ও উহার পরীক্ষা এবং করযোগ্য পণ্য পরিবহনকারী যানবাহন পরিদর্শন, তল্লপশী ও আটক;
(ঝ) পণ্য বা সেবা রপ্তানি এবং রপ্তানি সংক্রান্ত রেয়াত ও প্রত্যর্পণ পদ্ধতি;
(ঞ) এই ধারার অধীন প্রণীত কোন বিধি হইতে উদ্ভুত কোন বিষয় সম্পর্কে লিখিত নির্দেশ প্রদানের জন্য কমিশনার, মুল্য সংযোজন করকে ক্ষমতা প্রদান;
(ট) ধারা ৭১কক এর বিধান অনুযায়ী পুরস্কার প্রদান |

(৩) এই ধারার অধীন প্রণীত বিধিতে বোর্ড এইরূপ বিধান করিতে পারিবে যে কোন বিধি লঙ্ঘনকারী ব্যক্তি, এই আইনের অধীনে তাহার বিরুদ্ধে অন্য যে কোন ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণের বিধান ক্ষুণ্ন না করিয়া, সংশ্লিষ্ট পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের উপর প্রদেয় মূল্য সংযোজন কর বা, ক্ষেত্রমত, মূল্য সংযোজন কর ও সম্পূরক শুল্কের অনূর্ধ্ব দেড়গুণ পরিমাণ অর্থদণ্ডে দণ্ডনীয় হইবেন এবং উক্ত লঙ্ঘন যে পণ্য বা সেবা সম্পর্কিত হয় উহা সরকারের অনুকূলে বাজেয়াপ্ত হইবে ।”
25. Rule 38 of VAT Rules, 1991 is as follows:

“৩৮, আদেশ বা বিজ্ঞপ্তি বা ব্যাখ্যা বা পরিপত্র জারির ক্ষমতা ।_-এই বিধিমালা হইতে উদ্ভুত যেকোনো বিষয়ে বোর্ড বা কমিশনার বা পরিদপ্তরের মহাপরিচালক সময় সময় স্ব স্ব এখতিয়ারভুক্ত বিষয় সম্পর্কে আদেশ বা বিজ্ঞপ্তি বা ব্যাখ্যা বা পরিপত্র জারি করিতে পারিবেন ।”
26. Moreover, the Constitution of the Article 65(1) of People's Republic of Bangladesh provides that nothing shall prevent the Parliament from delegating its power to make orders, rules or other enactments having legislative effect. In addition, it is the established principle of law that the Legislature is not always required to legislate in its entirely to carry out all its work. Some of its functions is left out to be performed fully by persons technically conversant with the levy and realization thereof, or else the legislative scheme as to levy and realization may be frustrated. As such, we opine that High Court Division committed serious illegality in making the Rules Nisi absolute.

27. It is true that the writ petitioners submitted monthly return in statutory form "Mushak-19" stating its activities thereon. However, its monthly returns were duly accepted on being satisfied by the authority since no objection as to taking rebate by the writ petitioners was raised. But fact remains that section 26Ka(6) of the VAT Act, 1991 has put no bar on re-investigation or re-audit of the activities of any tax payer on reasonable ground even though it has been audited or investigated earlier. The relevant section states as follows-

“(৬) পুনঃ নিরীক্ষা ও পুনঃ অনুসন্ধান করিবার যুক্তিযুক্ত কারণ থাকিলে কোন ব্যক্তির কোন কর মেয়াদ সংশ্লিষ্ট কার্যত্রম নিরীক্ষিত বা অনুসন্ধানকৃত হওয়া সত্ত্বেও, উক্ত করদাতার অন্য কোন কর মেয়াদ সংশ্লিষ্ট কার্যক্রম পুন:নিরীক্ষা এবং পুনঃ অনুসনন্ধান করার ক্ষেত্রে কোন বাধা থাকিবে না।”
28. Hence, the writ petitioners cannot be absolved from any subsequent demand on the plea that the returns were submitted and those had been accepted without any instant objection whatsoever. In that view of the matter, the impugned Nathi dated 29.11.2018 issued by the writ respondent No. 4 providing explanation of Rule 31Ka of the VAT Rules, 1991 and thereby subsequent refusal to allow input-output co-efficient in favour of the writ petitioners as well as demand of VAT under section 55(1) of the Act of 1991 cannot be mandated as unlawful.

29. The aforementioned section 13 is as follows-

“রপ্তানিককৃত পণ্য প্রস্তুতে বা উৎপাদনে ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের উপর প্রদত্ত কর প্রত্যর্পণ ১৩(১) Customs Act, 1969 (IV of 1969) এর Chapter VI এর বিধানাবলীতে যাহা কিছু থাকুক না কেন, এই ধারার অধীনে যে কোন ব্যক্তি তৎ্কর্তৃক রপ্তানিকৃত পণ্য প্রস্তুতে বা উৎপাদনে বা রপ্তানিকৃত সেবায় বা রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য পণ্যে বা সেবায় বা ধারা ৩ এর উপ-ধারা (২) এ উল্লিখিত খাদ্য বা অন্য কোন সামগ্রীতে ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের উপর প্রদত্ত মূল্য সংযোজন কর, সম্পূরক শুল্ক, আমদানি শুল্ক, আবগারী শুল্ক ও অন্যান্য সকল প্রকার শুল্ক ও কর (আগাম প্রদত্ত আয়কর এবং রপ্তানি পণ্য প্রস্ততকরণে বা উৎপাদনে ব্যবহৃত, সরকার কর্তৃক সরকারী গেজেটে প্রজ্ঞাপন দ্বারা এতদুদ্দেশ্যে নির্ধারিত, কোন উপকরণের উপর প্রদত্ত সম্পূরক শুল্ক ব্যতীত) প্রত্যর্পণ হিসাবে পাওয়ার অধিকারী হইবেন:

তবে শর্ত থাকে যে, কোন রপ্তানীকৃত বা রপ্তানীকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য পণ্য বা সেবা রপ্তানির তারিখের এবং যেক্ষেত্রে নিশ্চিত ও অপরিবর্তনীয় রপ্তানি ঋণপত্রের অথবা অভ্যন্তরীণ ব্যাক টু ব্যাক ঋণপত্র অথবা স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের শর্তমোতাবেক আংশিক জাহাজীকরণের (Partial Shipment) ভিত্তিতে পণ্য রপ্তানি করা হয় সেক্ষেত্রে সর্বশেষ রপ্তানির তারিখের ছয় মাসের মধ্যে প্রত্যর্পণ (Drawback) দাবী করা না হইলে, এই ধারার অধীন প্রত্যর্পণ (Drawback) প্রদেয় হইবে না।

ব্যাখ্যা-_এই উপ-ধারায়, “রপ্তানির তারিখ”বলিতে যে তারিখের রপ্তানিকৃত পণ্য বা সেবার মালিক Customs Act এর section 131 এর বিধান অনুযায়ী উক্ত পণ্য বা সেবা রপ্তানির বিল অব এক্সপোর্ট সংশ্লিষ্ট কর্মকর্তার নিকট হস্তান্তর করেন সেই তারিখ বুঝাইবে।

(১ক) উপ-ধারা (১) এ যাহা কিছুই থাকুক না কেন, সরকার, সরকারী গেজেটে প্রজ্ঞাপন দ্বারা, রপ্তানিকৃত পণ্য প্রস্তুতে বা উৎপাদন বা রপ্তানিকৃত সেবায় বা রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য পণ্যে বা সেবায় ব্যবহৃত কোন নির্দিষ্ট উপকরণের উপর প্রদত্ত মূল্য সংযোজন কর এবং প্রবোজ্য ক্ষেত্রে, অন্যান্য শুল্ক বা কর প্রত্যর্পণের হার নির্ধারণ করিতে পারিবে ।

(২) কোন রপ্তানিকারক তৎ্কর্তৃক বাংলাদেশে সরবরাহকৃত পণ্য বা প্রদত্ত সেবার উপর প্রদেয় উৎপাদ করের বিপরীতে তৎকর্তৃক রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য পণ্যে বা সেবায় বা ধারা ৩ এর উপ-ধারা (২) এ উল্লিখিত খাদ্য বা অন্য কোন সামগ্রীতে ব্যবহৃত উপকরণের উপর উপ-ধারা (১) মোতাবেক প্রত্যর্পণযোগ্য যাবতীয় কর ও শুল্ক সমন্বয় করিতে পারিবেন।
------------
(৪) বোর্ড, সরকারী গেজেটে জারীকৃত আদেশ দ্বারা, আদেশে উল্লিখিত শর্ত সাপেক্ষে কোন উৎপাদিত কোন পণ্য বা সেবার উপর কোন ব্যক্তি বা সংস্থা কর্তৃক পরিশোধিত মূল্য সংযোজন কর বা, ক্ষেত্রমত, মুলা সংযোজন কর ও সম্পূরক শুদ্ধ প্রত্যর্পণের নির্দেশ প্রদান করিতে পারিবে।
30. Conversely, as no such right was vested upon the respondent company in the present case, it was in no way entitled for drawbacks/tax rebates as promised in the parent law. Therefore, any plea of against retrospection is not sustainable in the eye of law. Misinterpretation of the laws at their sweet will cannot be a ground for statutory relieves and if any such drawbacks was paid that must be refunded.

31. Here in the present case, the correlated enactment with reference to "drawback" of VAT of the parent law i.e. VAT Act, 1991 is section 13 and rule 31A is the delegated legislation thereof, which is practically consistent with the parent Act. The impugned explanation is another type of subordinate legislation irrespective of its status in the eye of law. At the same time the Office Order, dated 04.08.2013 i.e. Annexure-E(4) of the writ petition is too another subordinate legislation as per Rule 38 of VAT Rules, 1991.

32. For better understanding let's study the impugn explanation and Annexure-E(4) of the writ petition vis-à-vis-

“গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার
জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ড
রাজস্ব ভবন
সেগুনবাগিচা, ঢাকা
(মূসক আইন ও বিধি শাখা]
নথি নং-০৮-০১.০০০০.০৬৮.২০.০০১,১৬/৩৭৩
১৫ অগ্রহায়ন, ১৪২৫ বঙ্গাব্দ
তারিখ ২৯ নভেম্বর, ২০৯৮ খ্রিস্টাব্দ

বিষয়ঃ মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক উল্লিখিত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের বিষয়ে স্পষ্টীকরণ ও দিকনির্দেশনা।

সুত্রঃ কাস্টমস, এক্সাইজ ও ভ্যাট কমিশনারেট, চট্টগ্রাম এর পত্র নং-৪র্থ/এ৫১২)২১/মৃসক-উৎপাদন/রপ্তানী/সংদঃ/২০১৮/৪ ৭১৩, তারিখঃ ৪ নভেম্বর, ২০১৮ খ্রিস্টাব্দ।

উপর্যুক্ত বিষয় ও সূত্রের প্রতি আপনার দৃষ্টি আকর্ষণ করা হলো।

২। মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এ উল্লিখিত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সরবরাহ বা সেবা প্রদানের ক্ষেত্রে“রপ্তানি” এবং “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য” এ দুটো সংজ্ঞার পরিধি নিয়ে মাঠ পর্যায়ে জটিলতা পরিলক্ষিত হচ্ছে মর্মে জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ডকে অবহিত করা হয়েছে।

৩। এ সংক্রান্ত বিদ্যমান বিধি-বিধান জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ডে পর্যালোচনা করা হয়েছে। পর্যালোচনন্তে দেখা যায়, মুল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর মাধ্যমে মুলত বাংলাদেশে নিবন্ধিত কোন উৎপাদক বা সেবা প্রদানকারী প্রতিষ্ঠানকে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে কোন উন্নয়ন সহযোগী, বিদেশী রাষ্ট্র বা সংস্থার সাথে সরকারের সম্পাদিত আন্তর্জাতিক চুক্তি বা সমঝোতা স্মারকের আওতায় খণ, অনুদান বা অন্য কোন চুক্তির অধীন কোন পণ্য, কার্য বা সেবা ক্রয়ের বিপরীতে wary অংশগ্রহণের ক্ষেত্রে আন্তর্জাতিক বা বিদেশি প্রতিষ্ঠানের তুলনায় প্রতিযোগিতায় সক্ষমতা (Competitive Edge প্রদান) সৃষ্টি করা হয়েছে। অর্থাৎ, এ বিধির মাধ্যমে দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহ যাতে করে বিদেশী প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের তুলনায় দরপত্রে অংশগ্রহণের ক্ষেত্রে পিছিয়ে না পড়ে এবং খণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় প্রাপ্ত বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা যেন বিদেশি প্রতিষ্ঠানের মাধ্যমে পুনরায় দেশের বাহিরে চলে না যায় সে বিষয়টি বিবেচনায় রেখে মূলত দেশিয় প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক সম্পাদিত কার্যক্রমকে রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য করার বিধান রেখে শুল্ক কর প্রণোদনা প্রদান করা হয়েছে । তবে এক্ষেত্রে এ কার্যক্রম “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য” বিবেচিত হতে হলে দেশিয় প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক সরাসরি দরপত্র অংশগ্রহণের মাধ্যমে কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্তির বাধ্যবাধকতা রয়েছে।

৪। বৈদেশিক খণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় কোন প্রকল্প/কার্য/সেবা সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে আহ্বানকৃত স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপন্রের আওতায় কিংবা বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় বাংলাদেশের অভ্যন্তরে কোন পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহের ক্ষেত্রে কেবলমাত্র প্রাথমিকভাবে মনোনীত/কার্ধাদেশ প্রাপ্ত দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানসমূহের ক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩১ক এ বর্ণিত আনুষ্ঠানিকতা পরিপালন সাপেক্ষে পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহের ক্ষেত্রে“রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার সুবিধা প্রাপ্য হবে। উক্ত প্রাথমিকভাবে মনোনীত/কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান/কন্ট্রাক্টর কর্তৃক পরবতাঁতে পত্রিকায় দরপত্র আহ্বানের মাধ্যমে অন্যকোন প্রতিষ্ঠানকে প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে পণ্য/সেবা/সাব-কন্ট্রাক্টরকে কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক মূল কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান/কন্টরাক্টরকে একই প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের লক্ষ্যে পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহ করা হলে তা বিধি ৩১ক এর আওতায় “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার কোন আইনগত সুযোগ নেই। এটি বিধিতে যেমন স্পষ্ট করা হয়েছে তেমনি অনুচ্ছেদ-৩ এ উল্লিখিত কারণে তা আলোচ্য বিধি প্রণয়নের মূল চেতনা এর পরিপন্থি । কেননা, এক্ষেত্রে একটি খণ বা অনুদান চুক্তির আওতায় একটি নির্দিষ্ট প্রকল্প সম্পাদনে বাংলাদেশ সরকার একবারই বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা প্রাপ্ত হয় এবং সে কারণে প্রকল্প বাস্তবায়নকারী সংস্থা কর্তৃক প্রাথমিকভাবে আহ্বানকৃত আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত মূল দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানকে রপ্তানি সুবিধা প্রদান করা হয় । পরবর্তীতে আহ্বানকৃত আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের আওতায় কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত মূল দেশিয় নিবন্ধিত প্রতিষ্ঠানকে রপ্তানি সুবিধা প্রদান করা হয় । পরবর্তীতে উক্ত সুল কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক যদি একই প্রকল্পে পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহের লক্ষ্যে পুনরায় পত্রিকায় দরপত্র বিজ্ঞপ্তি আহ্বান করে কোন দ্বিতীয় পক্ষকে সাব-কন্ট্রাক্টর নিয়োগ করা হয় অথবা পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহের কার্যাদেশ প্রদান করা হয় সেক্ষেত্রে যেহেতু নতুন করে বাংলাদেশ সরকার কোন বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা প্রাপ্ত হয় না, সেহেতু পণ্য/সেবা সরবরাহ দ্বিতীয়বার “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ার কোন আইনগত সুযোগ নেই। প্রকল্প সম্পাদনের জন্য যে স্বত্ত্বার সাথে প্রাথমিক চুক্তি সম্পাদিত হয় শুধুমাত্র এ স্বত্ার জন্য পণ্য বা সেবার সরবরাহ বা কার্যসম্পাদন রপ্তানি বলে গণ্য। অন্যকোন সরবরাহকারী এক্ষেত্রে বিবেচনার সুযোগ নেই। কারণ এক্ষেত্রে প্রকল্প/চুক্তি সম্পাদনে মূল কার্ধাদেশপ্রাপ্ত প্রতিষ্ঠানের কার্যক্রম“রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হওয়ায় সরবরাহ চেইনে পরিশোধিত পূর্ববর্তী শুন্ধ-কর প্রত্যর্পণ প্রদান করা বিধান করা হয়েছে। তাই, প্রকল্প সম্পাদনে প্রাথমিকভাবে চুক্তিবদ্ধ স্বত্বা “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য” কার্যক্রম করে বিধায় এ সুবিধা প্রাপ্ত হবে, অন্যকেউ নয়।

৫। এছাড়া, পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট আইন, ২০০৬ এর ধারা ৩ এর দফা (ঘ) অনুযায়ী কোন উন্নয়নযোগী, বিদেশী রাষ্ট্র বা সংস্থার সহিত সরকারের সম্পাদিত কোন ঋণ, অনুদান বা অন্য কোন চুক্তির অধীন কোন পণ্য, কার্য বা সেবা ক্রয়ের ক্ষেত্রে পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট আইন, ২০০৬ এবং পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট রুল, ২০০৮ এর বিধান পরিপালন বাধ্যতামূলক। অর্থাৎ মুল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর আওতায় পণ্য বা সেবা সরবরাহ কার্যক্রম “রপ্তানিকৃত বলিয়া গণ্য”হতে হলে যে কোন স্থানীয় বা আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্র কার্যক্রম পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট রুল, ২০০৮ এর বিধান মোতাবেক সংঘটিত হওয়ার আইনি বাধ্যবাধকতা রয়েছে। কোন সংস্থা বা প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক পাবলিক প্রকিউরমেন্ট রুল, ২০০৮ অনুসরণপূর্বক দরপত্র কার্যক্রম সম্পন্ন না করলে সেক্ষেত্রে বিধি ৩১ক এ উল্লিখিত রপ্তানি সংশ্লিষ্ট সুবিধাদি প্রযোজ্য হবে না।

৬। সম্প্রতি কিছু কিছু প্রতিষ্ঠান মূল্য সংযোজন কর বিধিমালা, ১৯৯১ এর বিধি ৩১ক এর অপব্যবহার করে রাজস্ব ফাকি দিচ্ছে মর্মে জাতীয় রাজন্ব বোর্ডের গোচরীভূত হয়েছে। তাই এ জাতীয় প্রতিষ্ঠানের কার্যক্রম নিবিড় মনিটরিং করে প্রয়োজনে নিরীক্ষা কার্যক্রম সম্পাদনের মাধ্যমে আইনানুগ রাজস্ব আদায় করার জন্য সংশিষ্ট সকলকে নির্দেশক্রমে অনুরোধ করা হলো । বর্ণিতাবস্থায়, উপরোক্ত নির্দেশনা মোতাবেক যথাযথ আইনানুগ পদক্ষেপ গ্রহণের জন্য সংশ্লিষ্ট সকলকে নির্দেশ প্রদান করা হলো।

স্বাক্ষর
(মোঃ তারেক হাসান)
দ্বিতীয় সচিব (মূসক আইন ও বিধি)”
“গণপ্রজাতন্ত্রী বাংলাদেশ সরকার
জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ড
রাজস্ব ভবন
সেগুনবাগিচা, ঢাকা
নথি নং ৫(৯) শুল্কঃরপ্তানী ও বন্ড/২০০৭/৩৪২
তারিখ: ৪-৮-২০১৩ইং

অফিস আদেশ
বিষয়: বৈদেশিক ঋণপত্রের বিপরীতে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে দেশের অভ্যন্তরে সরবরাহকে রপ্তানি গণনাকরন প্রসঙ্গে ।

অনেক ক্ষেত্রে দেখা যায়, দেশের সরকারী, আধাসরকারী, স্বায়তৃশাসিত প্রতিষ্ঠানের আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের বিপরীতে বিদেশী কোন প্রতিষ্ঠান কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত হয় এবং উক্ত কার্যাদেশের অধীন সরবরাহতব্য পণ্য সংগ্র্রহের লক্ষ্যে চুক্তিবদ্ধ বিদেশী প্রতিষ্ঠান বৈদেশিক ঋণপত্র এবং বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে দেশের অভ্যন্তরে পণ্য সরবরাহের জন্য বাংলাদেশের কোন শিল্প কারখানার সাথে চুক্তিবদ্ধ হয়ে থাকে। আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের মাধ্যমে কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত বিদেশী প্রতিষ্ঠান বাংলাদেশ ব্যতীত তৃতীয় কোন দেশ হতে খণপত্রের মাধ্যমে পণ্য সংশ্রহ করে বাংলাদেশে পণ্য সরবরাহ করতে পারে । তবে সেক্ষেত্রে বাংলাদেশে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা প্রাপ্তি থেকে বঞ্চিত হবে । এ সকল বিবেচনায় কার্যাদেশ প্রাপ্ত বিদেশী প্রতিষ্ঠান বাংলাদেশী উৎপাদক প্রতিষ্ঠানকে ঋণপত্র দিয়ে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় পণ্য সংগ্রহকরণ পূর্বক বাংলাদেশে সরবরাহ করলে তা রপ্তানি হিসাবে গণ্য করা যোক্তিক। এ ধরণের Transaction এর ক্ষেত্রে বৈদেশিক ঋণপত্র এবং বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা যথাযথ প্রক্রিয়া অনুসরণপূর্বক বাংলাদেশ ব্যাংকের মাধ্যমে প্রত্যাবসিত হচ্ছে। এ জাতীয় পণ্য সরবরাহকে রপ্তানি হিসেবে গণ্য করা হলে একদিকে বৈদেশিক মুদ্রা অর্জন, কর্মসংস্থানের সুযোগ সৃষ্টি ও অন্যদিকে দেশী শিল্প প্রতিষ্ঠানের উৎপাদিত মান সম্পন্ন পণ্য সামগ্রীকে স্বীকৃতি প্রদান করার সুযোগ সৃষ্টি হবে । ২০১৩-২০১৪ অর্থ বছরের বাজেটে অর্থ আইন, ২০১৩ এর মাধ্যমে মূল্য সংযোজন কর আইন, ১৯৯১ এর ধারা ২(শ) এ বৈদেশিক মুদ্রার বিনিময়ে বাংলাদেশের অভ্যন্তরে সরবরাহকৃত পণ্য বা সেবাও রপ্তানীকৃত বলে গণ্য হবে মর্মে নতুন বিধান সংযোজিত হয়েছে। বন্ড সুবিধাভোগী কোন প্রতিষ্ঠান একই কার্যক্রম বিধান/নীতিমালা সুস্পষ্ট হওয়া প্রয়োজন ।
এমতাবস্থায়, The Customs Act, 1969 এর section 219B, মূল্য সংযোজন কর আইন, ১৯৯১ এর ধারা ২(শ) এবং বন্ডেড ওয়্যারহাউস বিধিমালা, ২০০৮ এর বিধি ২০ এ প্রদত্ত ক্ষমতাবলে, জাতীয় রাজস্ব বোর্ড কর্তৃক নিম্নরূপ আদেশ জারী করা হলো, যথাঃ-

সরকারী, আধাসরকারী, স্বায়তৃশাসিত প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক আহ্বানকৃত আন্তর্জাতিক দরপত্রের অধীনে বৈদেশিক খণপত্রের বিপরীতে শতভাগ রপ্তানীমুখী বন্ডেড প্রতিষ্ঠান কর্তৃক বৈদেশিক মুদ্রায় দেশের অভ্যন্তরে পণ্য সরবরাহকে রপ্তানী বলে গণ্য করা হবে।
২। এই আদেশ জনস্বার্থে জারী করা হলো এবং তা অবিলম্বে কার্যকর হবে।

স্বাক্ষর অস্পষ্ট
দ্বিতীয় সচিব (শুল্কঃরপ্তানী ও বন্ড)”
33. The respondent and the High Court Division greatly relied upon the aforesaid Annexure-E(4). Therefore the same must not be directly or indirectly in conflict with the provisions of the enabling law. On perusal of the concerned parent act, rules and the aforementioned delegated legislations our considered view is that the Annexure-E(4) is inconsistent with provisions spelled out in the parent Act and Rules. In augmentation of breath, the impugned explanation is the accurate and faithful expression of what enacted in the parent Act and Rules. In addition, it is a revenue generating issue of the State. Public at large and higher State interest in no way be overpowered on the authority of some misleading subordinate legislation and procedural glitches. If these are the situations, as the highest court of the land, we opine that the Appellate Division should invoke its mandate under article 104 of the Constitution of Bangladesh for doing complete justice for the nation itself. In the case of A.F.M. Naziruddin vs. Mrs. Hameeda Banu reported in 1992 12 BLD (AD) 261 Appellate Division observed that-

"Considering the vagaries of legal proceedings and the technicalities involved in adjudication, Art 104 of the Constitution has invested, as a measure of abundant caution, the last Court of the country with wide power, so it may forestall a failure of justice and do complete justice in an appropriate case. It is an extraordinary procedure for doing justice for completion of or putting an end to a cause or matter pending before this Court."
34. Accordingly, we find merit in the submissions of the learned Additional Attorney General appearing on behalf of the petitioners and the submissions of the Counsel of the respondents exposed having less than merit worthy.

35. However, this Division is not inclined to grant leave which will prolong the disposal of the matter. In that view of the matter, we are inclined to pass the appropriate order.

36. The reason elaborated above, we find that the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division do call for interference.

In the result, both the Civil Petitions for Leave Appeal are disposed of. The impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division is set aside without any order as to cost.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 71===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 191 of 2004

Decided On: 06.04.2022

Abdul Gaffar and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Md. Mohammad Ali and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Shah Monjurul Hoque, Advocate instructed by Md. Tawfique Hossain, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 16; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 54; Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 26, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 27, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 31, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 43, Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 47; Foreigners Act, 1946 - Section 14

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.06.2001 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 2148 of 1994

Disposition:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Borhanuddin, J.

1. This civil appeal by leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 25.06.2001 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 2148 of 1994 making the Rule absolute and imposing fine of Tk. 5000/- upon each of the appellants.

2. Brief facts are that the respondent No. 1 herein as petitioner filed the writ petition claiming enforcement of his fundamental rights as enshrined under Article 43 read with Article 31 of the Constitution, stating inter alia that one Md. Ashfaq Hussain and his niece Ms. Mina Mallik came to Bangladesh from India on 14.11.1994 to attend wedding reception of petitioner's daughter; Md. Ashfaq Hussain stayed in the house of his brother-in-law Dr. Mohammad Yunus of Grameen Bank and Ms. Mina Mallik became the house guest of the petitioner; On 17.11.1994 Ms. Mina Mallik went out with Mr. Md. Ashfaq Hussain to see around the city taking some apples with a fruit-knife in her bag; The writ-petitioner's wife and his family came to know that Ashfaq and Mina were arrested when writ-respondent No. 2 alongwith some constables forcibly entered the house of the petitioner and searched without any warrant at 10.00 p.m. on 17.11.1994 but found nothing incriminating in the house; Still the writ-respondents No. 3 and 4 with a contingent of police force entered and searched the house of the petitioner on 18th, 19th and 20th of November, 2004 at odd hours after midnight and on 19.11.2004 the writ-respondent No. 2 took away the bag of Mina without giving any receipt or preparing any seizure list but left her suitcase under lock and key; The petitioner was also served a notice under section 16 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on 19.10.1994 delivered to his wife after midnight and the notice contained instruction to handover the passport of Mina within 6.00 p.m. on that day; On each occasion the police entered and searched the house without warrant and without permission of the petitioner; The police also came with a microphone and loudly calls for the petitioner asking him to come out of the house as if they were looking for a criminal; Md. Ashfaq Hussain and Ms. Mina Mallick were shown arrested under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and later were released on bail; The police personnel led by the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 continued harassing the petitioner and members of his family as such the petitioner constrained to file the writ petition.

3. Upon hearing the petitioner a Division Bench of the High Court Division issued a Rule Nisi upon the respondents to show cause.

4. The respondent No. 1 Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs entered appearance and contested the Rule by filing an affidavit-in-opposition denying the allegations made in the writ petition and stating inter alia that the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 neither went to the house of the petitioner as alleged nor made search for passport and did not seized the bag of Ms. Mina Mallik from that house; A GD entry numbered 1122 dated 17.11.1994 lodged with Tejgaon Police Station under section 54 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and thereafter on 20.11.1994 G.R. Case No. 77 dated 20.11.1994 under section 14 of the Foreigners' Act was initiated on the basis of the written complaint made by the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Special Branch, on 17.11.1994; G.D. entries dated 17.11.1994, 18.11.1994 and 19.11.1994 are recorded showing visits of police to the house of the petitioner who was found absent; Md. Ashfaq Hussain and Ms. Mina Mallik being Indian Nationals were reported staying in Bangladesh illegally and therefore a case under section 14 of the Foreigners' Act was initiated against them. The rule is liable to be dismissed.

5. Upon hearing the parties and perusing the relevant laws, a Division Bench of the High Court Division made the Rule absolute with a direction to the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 each to pay, as token compensation, an amount of Tk. 5000/- to the petitioner within 4(four) months and also directed the respondent No. 2 Commissioner of the Dhaka Metropolitan Police to arrange the payment of the aforementioned token compensation amount to the petitioner realizing the same from the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 within the time prescribed above.

6. The High Court Division thoroughly and meticulously discussed the provisions of law relating to search and seizure contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure as well as the Dhaka Metropolitan Police, Ordinance 1976 alongwith Article 26, 27 and 47 of the Constitution. The High Court Division observed that:

"The news items published in the National Daily Newspapers, with facts and figures, show that the misdeeds and excesses done by many of the police personnel abusing their power or office are paining the society to consider the necessity for maintaining such police with the public exchequer and that the confidence of the people on the police is diminishing day by day."
7. And further observed that:

"The allegations being against the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the denial given in the affidavit-in-opposition by the deponent having no personal knowledge is of no use. More so when neither the writ-respondent No. 1 nor the deponent of the affidavit are competent to refute the personal allegations leveled against the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the allegations having made on oath and not being controverted by the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, according to law those are treated as true and correct and the allegations have been established. The respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were not prevented from appearing in this Rule and they did not refute the allegations at their risk. Thus the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 are found to have acted illegally in doing excesses in abuse of their power and without any lawful authority and that too beyond their local jurisdiction in the name of search for recovery of the passport of Ms. Mina Mallik and at midnight causing loss, injury, humiliation and harassments to the petitioner and the inmates of the house and damaging the house hold Articles. Such loss and injury appears to be irreparable and cannot be adequately compensated with money, however, the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, in the facts and circumstances should be burdened with token compensation which may give consolation to the petitioner and inmates of the house to some extent."
8. Feeling aggrieved, the writ-respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as petitioners filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 209 of 2002. Upon hearing the learned Advocate for the leave-petitioners, leave has been granted on 21.07.2004 alongwith an order of stay of the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division on 25.06.2001.

9. This matter was taken up for hearing by this Division on 01.03.2022, 08.03.2022 and 15.03.2022. Though learned Advocate for the appellants appeared but no one represented the respondent-writ petitioner. An application on behalf of the appellant No. 2 for condoning the compensation money filed on 15.03.2022 and similar application filed by the appellant No. 1 on 27.03.2022. Both the appellants filed separate application for condoning the compensation money stating that the applicants are law abiding citizens and have utmost respect for the law of the land. Both of them admitted that being junior police officer they could not dealt with the matter in appropriate manner and tenders unconditional apology before this Court. Both of them also stated that they served throughout their service life with due diligence in accordance with law and prayed to condone the compensation money considering their entire service career.

10. We have perused the applications filed by the appellants.

11. Since both the appellants filed application admitting that being junior police officer they could not dealt with the matter in appropriate manner and tenders unconditional apology and also considering their entire service career, we are inclined to condone the compensation amount of Tk. 5000/- as directed by the High Court Division to pay by each of the appellant Nos. 1 and 2 to the petitioner.

12. The police personnel should keep in mind that the police force being specially trained as disciplined force and enjoys extra benefits and protection are maintained by the Government with tax money of the public for the purpose to serve the public as such the police personnel should be more cautious to maintain dignity of their profession as well as protect human rights of the citizens alongwith other rights enshrined in the constitution.

13. The applications for condoning the compensation money are allowed. The appellants are exonerated from paying the compensation money.

14. Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of with the above observation.

15. No order as to cost.

16. Let a copy of the judgment and order be sent to the respondent No. 2 Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and respondent No. 3 Inspector General of Police and the Commissioner, Dhaka Metropolitan Police, Dhaka, for information and taking necessary measures.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 68===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Petition Nos. 957 of 2021 and 1111 of 2022

Decided On: 17.10.2022

Hasina Akhter and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Amena Begum and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Hamidur Rahman, Advocate-on-Record instructed by Md. Momin Uddin, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Mirza Salah Uddin Ahmed, Advocate-on-Record instructed by Mohammad Abdul Hai, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 561A
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 114
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 313
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 323
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 342
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 379

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.02.2021 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 58314 of 2019

 
Disposition:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
M. Enayetur Rahim, J.

1. Both the criminal petition for leave to appeals have been filed against the judgment and order dated 10.02.2021 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 58314 of 2019 making the Rule absolute and thereby quashed the proceeding of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Case No. 658 of 2010 arising out of Kotwali Model Police Station Case No. 55 dated 31.07.2010 corresponding to G.R. Case No. 563 of 2010 pending in the Court of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal, Barishal.

2. The relevant facts leading to the filing of these leave petitions are as follows: The informant petitioner (C.P. No. 957 of 2021) Hasina Akhter on 31.07.2010 lodged a First Information Report (FIR) with the Kotwali Model Police Station, Barishal against the 5(five) persons including the present-respondents and same was registered as Kotwali Model Police Station Case No. 55 dated 31.07.2010. It was alleged therein that the accused-Kalam Mollah cohabited with the informant with deceitful promise to marry her since July, 2007 and at one stage she became pregnant. When she became pregnant, she requested accused-Kalam Mollah to marry her and to take her in his house but accused-Kamal Mollah took time on various pleas; on 30.07.2010 accused-Kalam Mollah told the informant to go to Natullahbad Bus Stand and thereafter at 11.00 a.m. she went to the said Bus Stand and from there she with the accused-Kalam Mollah went to Hotel 'Royal' by a motorcycle. Then they have finished their lunch there and at 12.30 p.m. they went to Shahnaj complex at Borura and after 10 minutes the other accused entered into the room and all the accused detained her into a room. The accused Salina Begum pushed her an injection and the other accused persons pushed her two more injections and on her hue and cry the people informed the police and police recovered her at 14.35 hours and caught red handed accused-Salina Begum with instruments of M.R. The other accused including Kalam Mollah fled away. Accused Tutul snatched away a chain made of gold weighting 8 annas valued at Taka 17,000/-. Thereafter on consultation with parents and the relatives she lodged the first information report (FIR).

3. On the basis of the aforesaid allegations, Kotwali Police Station Case No. 55 dated 31.07.2010 has been lodged against all the accused persons under section 9(1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 read with sections 342/323/313/379/114 of the Penal Code.

4. After completing investigation, the police submitted charge-sheet against the accused persons under section 9(1) of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 read with sections 342/323/313/379 and 114 of the Penal Code including the present accused respondents.

5. The case being ready for trial the case record was transmitted to the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal, Barishal which was registered as Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Case No. 658 of 2010. The Tribunal after hearing the respective parties framed charge under section 9(1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 read with section 313 of the Penal Code against accused-Kalam Mollah and under section 313 of the Penal Code against the other accused persons.

6. Eventually, the informant Hasina Akhter was examined before the Tribunal by the prosecution and she was duly cross-examined by the defence.

7. At this stage the present accused respondents moved before the High Court Division by filing an application under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the proceeding. A Division Bench of the High Court Division initially issued Rule and also stayed the proceeding pending before the Tribunal. Eventually, the Rule was heard by a Division Bench of the High Court Division and the High Court Division by the impugned judgment and order dated 10.02.2021 made the Rule absolute and thereby quashed the proceeding of Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Case No. 658 of 2010.

8. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order the informant has preferred criminal petition for leave to appeal No. 957 of 2021 and on behalf of the State criminal petition for leave to appeal No. 1111 of 2022 has also been filed.

9. Mr. Hamidur Rahman, learned Advocate, appearing for the informant-petitioner (C.P. No. 957 of 2021) submits that the Tribunal having found prima-facie case against the accused persons framed charge under section 9(1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Tribunal, 2000 read with section 313 of the Penal Code and in support of the prosecution case the informant has already been examined as P.W.-1, but the High Court Division quashed the proceeding relying on the evidence of P.W.-1 and thereby committed serious error of law.

10. Mr. Rahman, further submits that the High Court Division failed to appreciate that in the midst of the trial there is no scope to consider, evaluate or assess the evidence adduced by the prosecution invoking section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure but in the instant case the High Court Division in taking consideration of the said materials quashed the proceeding and thereby committed serious error of law.

11. Mr. Sheikh Mohammad Morshed, learned Additional Attorney General, has also assailed the impugned judgment and submits that the High Court Division in the garb of exercising power under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure in fact assumed the jurisdiction of the trial Court and thus, committed serious error in passing the impugned judgment and order.

12. Per Contra, Mr. Mirza Salah Uddin Ahmed, learned Advocate, appearing for the accused respondent having supported the impugned judgment and order submits that the High Court Division on consideration of the evidence of P.W.-1, medical report and other materials available on record rightly came to a finding that if the proceeding is allowed to be continued, in that event it will be share abuse of the process of the Court and as such rightly quashed the proceeding.

13. We have considered the rival submissions of the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the impugned judgment and order and other materials as placed before us.

14. Upon perusal of the impugned judgment and order it transpires that the High Court Division having considered the evidence of P.W.-1 and medical report has quashed the proceeding.

15. Now the moot question is whether in exercising power under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure the High Court Division can consider, assess, evaluate the part evidence adduced by the prosecution before conclusion of the trial. It is by now well settled that quashment of a Criminal Proceeding under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure is possible in cases of;
i) facts alleged not constituting any offence;
ii) the proceeding is barred by law;
iii) coram non-judice;
iv) lack of legal evidence adduced;
v) for ends of justice.

16. Having considered the facts and circumstances of the present case, coupled with the above proposition of law, we have no hesitation to hold that above ingredients for quashing are absent in the present case and further, prima-facie offence has been disclosed against the accused persons in the FIR and charge sheet and the Tribunal having found prima-facie case framed charge against the accused persons. Falsity or truth of the allegation has to be decided at the trial in the light of the evidence adduced by the parties.

17. The High Court Division committed serious error in considering the evidence of P.W.-1 and medical report in exercising the power under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure at this stage when the prosecution yet not completed to adduce its evidence. The High Court Division has not been empowered to usurp the jurisdiction of the trial Court invoking section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

18. In the case of Golam Sarwar Hiru vs. The State and another, reported in 13 MLR 103 (AD) this Division has held that neither the High court Division nor the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court is in favour of entertaining application under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashment of proceedings at the stage when trial has already begun and prosecution witnesses are examined.

19. In the case of Habibur Rahman Mollah Vs. the State reported in 62 DLR (AD), 233 this Division has also held that it is the consistent views of the superior courts of this subcontinent that the High court Division which exercising its power under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure should not usurp the jurisdiction of the trial Court.

20. Having considered and discussed as above, we find merit in the leave petitions.

21. However, since the respondent accused have appeared in the leave petitions and their learned Advocate made his submission at length, we are of the view that to avoid further delay of disposal of the case justice will be best served if we dispose of the leave petitions without granting any leave.

22. Accordingly, both the leave petitions are disposed of.

23. The judgment and order dated 10.02.2021 passed by the High Court Division is hereby set aside. The Tribunal is directed to proceed with the case in accordance with law.


  "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
---
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 60===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions Nos. 1432-1434 and 1441 of 2022

Decided On: 27.10.2022

The State
... Vs. ...
Md. Kabir Biswas and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: A.M. Amin Uddin, Attorney General and Saiful Alam, Assistant Attorney General instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 111
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 323

Prior History:
From the Order dated 11.10.2022 & 12.10.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case Nos. 51229 of 2022, 51214 of 2022, 52074 of 2022 and 51520 of 2022

 
Disposition:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Obaidul Hassan, J.

1. These Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions No. 1432, 1433, 1434 and 1441 of 2022 are being disposed of by this common judgment as all the cases involve common questions of law.

2. These Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions are directed at the instance of the opposite parties-appellants against the order dated 11.10.2022 and 12.10.2022 granting the accused-petitioners-respondents anticipatory bail passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case Nos. 51229 of 2022, 51214 of 2022, 52074 of 2022 and 51520 of 2022.

3. At the outset we consider it imperative to mention the brief facts of each case.

Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 1432 of 2022:

4. On 24.08.2022 the First Information Report (FIR) has been lodged against the accused Md. Kabir Biswas with the concerned police station and the same was registered as Baliakandhi Police Station Case No. 17 dated 24.08.2022 corresponding to G.R. No. 125 of 2022 under Table 10(Ka) of Section 36(1) of Madok Drobbo Niyontron Ain, 2018.

5. The FIR states that on 24.08.2022 at about 16.00 hours being tipped of secret information the Deputy Inspector of Madok Drobbo Niyontron Odhidoptor being accompanied by the members of raiding party conducted a raid as a part of anti-narcotic drive at the homestead of the accused in presence of the local witnesses and recovered 200 pieces Yaba tablets containing Amphetamine weighing 20 grams from the bed room of the accused. The said Yaba tablets were then seized by preparing a seizure list, but the accused could not be apprehended as he managed to flee the scene.

Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 1433 of 2022:

6. On 14.09.2022 an FIR has been lodged against the accused Mst. Bithi Begum alias Hasi with the concerned police station and the same was registered as Sadar Model Police Station Case No. 24 dated 14.09.2022 corresponding to G.R. No. 453 of 2022 under Table 8(Ka) and 8(Ga) of Section 36(1) and 41 of Madok Drobbo Niyontron Ain, 2018.

7. The accusation arraigned in the FIR in brief is that on 14.09.2022 at about 16.00 hours being tipped of secret information while the Deputy Inspector of Madok Drobbo Niyontron Odhidoptor along with the members forming the raiding party was on move towards the Station Road at Zia Nagar, they found accused Md. Moyen Ali in front of the shop of one Md. Qurban Ali and on making search of his body 20 puria heroin weighing 02 grams were recovered and he was apprehended. On being quizzed said Md. Moyen Ali told that he collected the said heroin from the accused Bithi Begum alias Hashi. Later on, at about 17.00 hours the raiding party headed toward the homestead of accused Bithi Begum alias Hashi and on search they recovered heroin weighing 100 grams from her bed room. During the raid the accused Bithi Begum alias Hashi was not found present in her house.

Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 1434 of 2022:

8. On 13.09.2022 an FIR has been lodged against the accused Md. Akram Mollik with the concerned police station and the same was registered as Kotwali Police Station Case No. 48 dated 13.09.2022 corresponding to G.R. No. 784 of 2022 under Section 9(1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 (as amended in 2003).

9. It has been alleged that on 13.09.2022 at about 8:30 A.M. while the informant's daughter aged about 10 years old was engaged in cooking in the kitchen of their homestead, finding her alone the accused Md. Akram Mollik committed rape upon her forcefully which caused grave injuries to her private organ. Due to the sound of rainfall none could hear the scream of the victim. The accused left the crime scene by extending threat to the victim that she would be slaughtered with machete if she would disclose the incident to anyone. At the relevant time the informant along with his other family inmates remained outside the house. He along with his family inmates excepting the victim went to his in-laws house on 11.09.2022. Thereafter, the victim disclosed the event to her aunt and on 13.09.2022 at about 9:00 A.M. her uncle Md. Akkas Bepari informed the incident to the informant, the father of the victim. As the victim fell ill she was admitted to Bangabandhu Medical College Hospital, Faridpur and her treatment was going on there.

Criminal Miscellaneous Petition No. 1441 of 2022:

10. On 19.06.2022 an FIR was lodged against the accused Md. Akram Mollik with the concerned police station and the same was registered as Ulipur Police Station Case No. 13 dated 19.06.2022 corresponding to G.R. No. 153 of 2022 under Section 9(1) of the Nari-O-Shishu Nirjatan Daman Ain, 2000 (as amended in 2003) read with Section 323 of the Penal Code.

11. The victim being the informant lodged ejahar against the accused to set the law on motion alleging inter alia that she along with her husband had been living at the rented house owned by one Md. Abu Taher for one and a half year. Her husband used to run a betel leaf shop at Tabakpur Rail Gate. The accused person attempted to give love proposal to her and incited her to make sexual relationship with him at several occasions. But the victim did not agree with the unholy relationship. On 13.06.2022 at about 9:00 P.M. the informant fell asleep at her bedroom with her minor daughter, later on, at about 9:30 P.M. the accused person came to her house and knocked the door. Believing that her husband came, as soon as the informant opened the door the accused entered inside the room and forcefully raped her. At one stage of violence, while the informant started screaming loudly her husband rushed to the spot hearing the scream. No sooner her husband entered inside the bedroom the accused person smacked her husband in his head, neck and back of the body with bricks and also caused wounds at various parts of his the body by beating with steel pipe. Thereafter, the informant and her husband got admitted to Ulipur Health Complex to undergo necessary medical treatment.

12. Mr. A.M. Amin Uddin, the learned Attorney General along with Mr. Saiful Alam, the learned Assistant Attorney General appearing for the petitioner assailed that the High Court Division passed the impugned orders illegally and without applying judicial mind to the gravity and nature of arraignments. The learned Attorney General contended next that the High Court Division granted anticipatory bail to the respondents flouting the decision of this Division rendered in the case reported in 66 DLR (AD) 92 and 71 DLR (AD) 364. The learned Counsel lastly contended that the High Court Division did not take into consideration of the fact that there are specific allegations against the every respondent in the respective cases.

13. We have considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner, perused orders passed by the High Court Division as well as the materials on record

14. It has been divulged from the record that in all the Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions the respondents surrendered before the High Court Division and they were granted anticipatory bail by the said Division. Now, it is disputed in these Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions that whether the High Court Division was authorized to exercise the power of granting anticipatory bail in cases involving the offences of rape, narcotics recovery etc.

15. The above crucial question was fairly answered by this Division in the year 2019. A full-bench of seven member Judges of this Division headed by the Hon'ble Chief Justice formulated some principles to be followed by the Court while dealing with the anticipatory bail. Referring a number of case laws from the domestic and foreign jurisdiction this Division in the case of State vs. Professor Dr. Morshed Hasan Khan and 16 others reported in 71 DLR (AD) 364 paragraphs-51 & 52 held in the following manner:

"No inflexible guidelines or straitjacket formula can be provided for grant or refusal of anticipatory bail. No attempt should be made to provide right and inflexible guidelines in this respect because all circumstances and situations of future cannot be clearly visualised for the grant or refusal of anticipatory bail. Few principles for grant of anticipatory bail can be summarised as follows:

(i) The F.I.R. lodged against the accused needs to be thoroughly and carefully examined;

(ii) The gravity of the allegation and the exact role of the accused must be properly comprehended;

(iii) The danger of the accused absconding if anticipatory bail is granted;

(iv) The character, behavior, means, position and standing of the accused;

(v) Whether accusation has been made only with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by arresting him. Because it is to be remembered that a worst agony, humiliation and disgrace is attached to arrest. Arrest leads to many consequences not only for the accused but for his entire family and at the same time for the entire community;

(vi) A balance has to be struck between two factors, namely, no prejudice should be caused to free, fair and thorough investigation and there should be prevention of harassment, humiliation and unjustified detention of the accused;

(vii) The anticipatory bail being an extraordinary privilege should be granted only in exceptional cases. Such extraordinary judicial discretion conferred upon the Higher Court has to be properly exercised after proper application of mind to decide whether it is a fit case for granting anticipatory bail not according to whim, caprice or fancy;

(viii) A condition must be imposed that the applicant shall not make any inducement or threat to the witnesses for tampering the evidence of the occurrence;

(ix) The apprehension that the accused is in a position to influence, induce or coerce witnesses to desist from furnishing relevant information to the investigating agency cannot be considered to be imaginary and the court ought to have considered that aspect seriously before granting anticipatory bail;

(x) In the cases involve grave offence like murder, dacoity, robbery, rape etc. where it is necessary to arrest the accused and bring his movements under restraint to infuse confidence among the terror-stricken victims the accused should never be enlarged on anticipatory bail. Such discretion should be exercised with care and circumspection depending upon the facts and circumstances justifying its exercise;

(xi) It is to be borne in mind about the legislative intention for the purpose of granting anticipatory bail because legislature has omitted the provision of Section 497A from the Code;

(xii) It would be improper exercise of such extraordinary judicial discretion if an accused is enlarged on anticipatory for an indefinite period which may cause interruption on the way of holding thorough and smooth investigation of the offence committed;

(xiii) The Court must be extremely cautious since such bail to some extent intrudes in the sphere of investigation of crime;

(xiv) While enlarging an accused on anticipatory bail, the Court must direct the applicant to co-operate with the investigating officer in every steps of holding proper investigation if the same is needed;

(xv) The anticipatory bail granted by the Court should ordinarily be continued not more than 8(eight) weeks and shall not continue after submission of charge sheet, and the same must be in connection with non-bailable offence;

(xvi) The Court granting anticipatory bail will be at liberty to cancel the bail if a case for cancellation of bail is otherwise made out by the State or complainant.

The indicatives of this Division given in the case of State V. Abdul Wahab Shah Chowdhury that "such extraordinary remedy and exception to the general law of bail should be granted only in extraordinary and exceptional circumstances upon a proper and intelligent exercise of discretion" should be followed strictly."

(underlines supplied)

16. The aforesaid guidelines enunciated by this Division in the abovementioned case indisputably have a binding effect. Here we do not dilate our discussion on granting anticipatory bail vis-a-vis the scope and the legal provisions regarding the same to avoid the prolixity of discussion since the matter has well been settled in the aforesaid case of State vs. Professor Dr. Morshed Hasan Khan and others (supra).

17. Suffice it to reiterate that pursuant to the provisions enunciated in Article 111 of the Constitution of Bangladesh the law declared by the Appellate Division does have binding effect on the High Court Division and all other courts. Article 111 of the Constitution provides as follows:

"The law declared by the Appellate Division shall be binding on the High Court Division and the law declared by either division of the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts subordinate to it."

18. In the case of Secretary, Posts and Telecommunications Division, Ministry of Posts and another vs. Shudangshu Shekhar Bhadra and others reported in 25 ALR (AD) [2022] 19 paragraph-22 this Division very eloquently stated that:

"............... the provision of Article 111 of the Constitution enjoining upon all courts below to obey the law laid down by this Court, judicial discipline requires that the High Court Division should follow the decision of the Appellate Division and that it is necessary for the lower tiers of courts to accept the decision of the higher tiers as a binding precedent. This view was poignantly highlighted in Cassell & Co. Ltd. vs. Broome and another, (1972) AC 1027 where Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone, the Lord Chancellor, in his judgment said:

"The fact is, and I hope it will never be necessary to say so again, that, in the hierarchical system of courts which exists in this country, it is necessary for each lower tier, including the Court of Appeal, to accept loyally the decisions of the higher tiers."

(underlines supplied)

19. In view of above it is quite evident that the ratio decided by this Division is binding on the High Court Division as well as other subordinate courts. But the impugned orders passed by the High Court Division stand in glaring violation of the precedents of this Hon'ble Court, which is not at all desirable and expected from the High Court Division.

20. On scrutiny of the impugned orders passed by the High Court Division, we are constrained to observe that the same are totally unwarranted and have been made flouting the specific allegations surfaced in FIR. In such cases involving the offences of grave sexual ravishment and narcotics recovery the High Court Division ought not to have exercised its jurisdiction in providing protection of the accused persons by granting anticipatory bail to them.

21. The High Court Division must keep in mind that to ensure judicial discipline it is obliged to follow the decision of the Appellate Division. Glaring non application of judicial mind of the High Court Division, as it appears, in allowing an anticipatory bail seems to be an instance of defiance of the settled legal proposition. It is highly deprecated.

22. It should be kept in mind that the Investigating Officer (IO) deserves free-hand space to go on with the task of investigation to arrive at its logical conclusion. The impugned orders cannot be said to be the outcome of judicial discretion. It is to be noted that judicial discretion refers to power to make a decision chiefly guided by the principles of law. Judicial discretion has always to be exercised not according to whim and without considering the gravity of offences.

23. The High Court Division should have paid due attention to gravity of offences and specific allegations which are the parameters while granting anticipatory bail to an accused. But it has been divulged that the orders of High Court Division granting anticipatory bails without taking the nature and gravity of the arraignments into account indubitably has created clog to the investigation and also extends frustration to the victims of hideous sexual aggression. Such orders of High Court Division rather obstructs natural course of criminal justice system.

24. Discretion vested in the High Court Division in dealing with the prayer seeking anticipatory bail must be exercised with due care and prudence depending upon the nature of accusations and averments. But it appears that the High Court Division pitiably failed to go on in light of the guidelines and principles propounded by the highest court i.e. the Appellate Division.

25. The orders passed by the High Court Division in dealing with the matter of anticipatory bail rather indicate conspicuous stamp of gross reluctance in exercising true and fair judicial mind. It appears that the High Court Division remained deliberately abstained from accepting loyally the decisions of the higher tiers. Judicial discretion has always to be exercised not according to whim and without considering the gravity of offences and material aspects. It should have been considered that the offence of sexual aggression arraigned degraded and defiled the soul of helpless minor girl and woman.

Errors in judgment text fixed.
26. The impugned orders granting anticipatory bail to the respondents do not depict that while exercising the power of granting bail the High Court Division took into consideration, inter alia, the prima facie case placed against the accused, the gravity of the crime along with the severity of punishment prescribed for the offences arraigned, the character of the evidence, position and status of the accused with reference to the victim and witnesses, the likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice and repeating the offence, the possibility of his tampering with the witnesses and obstructing the course of justice and such other grounds.

27. It is to be noted that each criminal case demonstrates its own peculiar factual matrix, and therefore, certain grounds peculiar to a particular case deserve to be taken into account by the court. But to our utter dismay the High Court Division has not even gone through the FIR let alone complying with the directives given by this Division.

28. But it depicts explicitly that the High Court Division considered the anticipatory bail of the respondents mechanically, whimsically and capriciously, flouting settled legal propositions. It has come to our notice that some of the benches of the High Court Division are exercising the power of granting anticipatory bail indiscriminately without adherence to law. In doing so the High Court Division travelled beyond its periphery. Such act of the High Court Division is deprecated seriously. Discretion the High Court Division exercised in granting anticipatory bail cannot be termed fair and intending to secure justice. Rather, such orders were capricious causing adverse impact upon the criminal justice system.

29. It is pertinent to mention here that the latitude given to the High Court Division while exercising the discretionary power of granting anticipatory bail must be guided by the principles laid down by the Appellate Division. But the High Court Division passed the impugned orders overstepping its limits. We have given our anxious consideration to such unwarranted attitude of the High Court Division. Such derogatory trend of the High Court Division shall leave an adverse impression upon the criminal to get an upper hand through the hands of law. In such backdrop, our considered view is that the High Court Division and all other courts are bound to follow the law and propositions enunciated by this Division in the case of State vs. Professor Dr. Morshed Hasan Khan and others (supra). We also direct the High Court Division to refrain from unscrupulous exercise of the power of granting anticipatory bail.

30. Thus, finally taking note to the patent violation of settled decision of this Division regarding the anticipatory bail, we disapprove the manner in which the High Court has adjudicated the anticipatory bail applications preferred by the respondents. In the light of the observations made above, we find merit in the submissions of the learned Attorney General. Therefore, the impugned redress passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

31. Accordingly, these Criminal Miscellaneous Petitions No. 1432, 1433, 1434 and 1441 of 2022 are disposed of.

32. Let the operation of the orders dated 11.10.2022 and 12.10.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Cases No. 51229 of 2022, 51214 of 2022, 52074 of 2022 and 51520 of 2022 arising out of Tender Nos. 59226 of 2022, 59082 of 2022, 59640 of 2022 and 59037 of 2022 so far as these relate to the interim orders of anticipatory bail granted in favour of the respondents be stayed.

33. The respondent namely, Md. Kabir Biswas, son of late Rahomat Biseas and late Achis Begum of Village-Baliakandi, Ward No. 5, Union Parishad-Baliakandi, Police Station-Baliakandi, District-Rajbari, is directed to surrender before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rajbari at once, failing which, the said Court shall take appropriate steps to bring him in jail custody.

34. The respondent namely, Mst. Bithi Begum alias Hasi, daughter of Md. Esahak Ali and Mst. Ozua Begum, wife of Md. Zakir Hossein of Village-Fakir Para, Holding No. 30, Permanent address-Huzrapara Zianagar, Police Station-Sadar Model, District-Chapai Nawabganj is directed to surrender before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Chapai Nawabganj at once, failing which, the said Court shall take appropriate steps to bring her in jail custody.

35. The respondent namely, Md. Akram Mollik, son of Md. Ali Akbar of Village-Kosundi, Police Station-Magura Sadar, District-Magura, At present-Father-in-law-Samad Bepari of Village-Rajapur, Police Station-Kotwali, District-Faridpur is directed to surrender before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Faridpur at once, failing which, the said Court shall take appropriate steps to bring him in jail custody.

36. The respondent namely, Md. Aowlad Hossain, son of late Dulu Miah of Village-Mollapara, Union Parishad-Tabakpur, Police Station-Ulipur, District-Kurigram is directed to surrender before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kurigram at once, failing which, the said Court shall take appropriate steps to bring him in jail custody.

37. Let a copy of this judgment be sent to the concerned Courts below, immediately.


  "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."

===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 56===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 887 of 2022

Decided On: 31.08.2022

Durnity Daman Commission
... Vs. ...
Md. Kutub Uddin Ahmmed and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, Borhanuddin and Krishna Debnath, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Khurshid Alam Khan, Senior Advocate instructed by Shahanara Begum, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Md. Munsurul Hoque Chowdhury, Senior Advocate instructed by Mohammad Ali Azam, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 109
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 409
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 420
Prevention Of Corruption Act, 1947 - Section 5(2)

Prior History:
From the Order dated 14.07.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 2362 of 2022

 
Disposition:
Disposed of

JUDGMENT
Md. Nuruzzaman, J.

1. This criminal petition for leave to appeal is directed against the order dated 14.07.2022 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 2362 of 2022 granting bail to the respondent No. 1 in a pending criminal appeal arising out of the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 14.02.2022 passed by the Special Judge (District and Sessions Judge), Court No. 6, Dhaka in Special Case No. 16 of 2019 arising out of Gulshan Thana Case No. 06 dated 08.04.2018 corresponding to GR No. 23 of 2018 under sections 420 of the Penal code, 1860 and section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.

2. Prosecution case, in brief, is that one Mirza Jahidul Islam, Deputy Director of Durnity Daman Commission as informant lodged the First Information Report (hereinafter referred as FIR) alleging inter alia that the convict-respondent No. 1, being a public servant abusing his power for fraudulent purpose, collusively and breaching trust criminally misappropriated 10 Kathas land under Gulshan Police Station, Mouza: Vola, C.S. Khatian No. 98, C.S. and S.A. Plot No. 457 by executing the same land in the name of different persons and has committed offence under section 409/420/109 of Penal Code, 1860 and under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947; that, the informant also alleged that the said land including 3.85 acres of land of C.S. and S.A. Plot No. 457 was acquired in L.A. Case No. 10/63-64; that, the said land was returned to the original owner by taking back the compensation money; that, thereafter RAJUK decided to acquire that land again, in this back drop, one Khademul Islam filed Writ Petition No. 835 of 1977 challenging the L.A. Case before the High Court Division. The High Court Division after hearing the parties passed the judgment by declaring the L.A. Case No. 10-63-64 is illegal; that, the Ministry of Land released 16.942 acres of land including 86.50 decimals land of Plot No. 457 in official gazette; that, this gazette was challenged by RAJUK before the High Court Division and ultimately the gazettes were declared illegal by the Appellate Division and this way, RAJUK become owner of the land but since the convict-respondent No. 1 by his influence got the gazettes published and collusively for his benefit and got the land in the name of his father-in-law and hence, he has committed offence under sections 409/420/109 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. Hence, the informant lodged the FIR against the respondent No. 1 under sections 409/420/109 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. Accordingly, Gulshan Police Station Case No. 6 dated 08.04.2018 corresponding to G.R. No. 23/2018 under sections 409/420/109 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 was started against the convict-respondent No. 1. Hence this case.

3. The Investigating Officer of Durnity Daman Commission (hereinafter referred as Commission) investigated the case as a schedule offence of the Durnity Daman Commission Ain, 2004. During investigation, the Investigating Officer collected the materials on record, recorded the statement of witnesses and after completing the investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted memo of evidence before the Commission. That the Commission after perusing the memo of evidence and other materials on record, accorded sanction under section 32 of the Durnity Daman Commission Ain, 2004. The Investigating Officer after obtaining sanction from the Commission, submitted charge-sheet along with the sanction before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka being Charge-sheet No. 91 dated 31.03.2019 against the respondent No. 1 under sections 409/420/109 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (II of 1947).

4. The learned Special Judge, Court No. 6, Dhaka after hearing both the parties and considering the evidence and materials on record convicted the respondent No. 1 and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 05 (five) years under section 420 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 with a fine of Tk. 15,20,000/- (Taka fifteen lac twenty thousand), in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of 1 (one) year more by the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 14.02.2022.

5. Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 14.02.2022 passed by the Special Judge, Court No. 6, Dhaka, the accused-appellant preferred Criminal Appeal No. 2362 of 2022 along with an application for bail before the High Court Division.

6. The High Court Division, upon hearing both the parties, granted bail to the accused appellant petitioner for a period of 6 (six) months from date by the impugned order dated 14.07.2022.

7. Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 14.07.2022 of the High Court Division, the respondent No. 2 as petitioner herein preferred the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 887 of 2022 before this Division.

8. Mr. Md. Khurshid Alam Khan, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that in the bail granting order, it has been mentioned by the High Court Division that there is no immediate prospect of early hearing of the appeal and it is uncertain as to when the appeal will be heard and disposed of which is totally contrary to record. It has been argued before the High Court Division by the petitioner relying upon order dated 19.05.2022 and in the said order, it has been clearly shows that the case is ready for hearing. But the High Court Division without considering the same illegally granted bail to the convict respondent No. 1. He further submits that, the High Court Division without considering the gravity of the offense illegally granted bail to the convict-respondent No. 1, which is not in accordance with law. He next submits that, the allegation of criminal misconduct and fraud has been duly proved before the trial Court by oral and documentary evidences and, as such, question of bail in a sentence of five years does not arise at all. But the High Court Division without considering the same illegally granted bail to the respondent No. 1. He further submits that, the High Court Division granted bail with an observation that, the convict-respondent No. 1, is a man of 62 years. When the gravity of the offense is serious in nature and being a public servant committed gross criminal misconduct which has been duly proved before the trial Court, question of bail on the ground of age is not a valid ground. Hence, the High Court Division committed serious illegality in granting bail to the convict respondent No. 1. He finally submits that when the criminal appeal ready for hearing, it is the duty of the High Court Division to fix the matter immediately for hearing/disposing of the matter without any delay. But the High Court Division without considering the said submission illegally granted bail to the respondent No. 1 without fixing the matter for hearing and, as such, the impugned order passed by the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

9. Mr. Monsurul Hoque Chowdhury, the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1 made submissions in support of the impugned order of the High Court Division. He submits that there is no legal evidence against the respondent No. 1 to sustain the conviction under section 420 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. He further submits that the respondent No. 1 is man of 62 years old having attacked with acute Ischemic Stroke with right side hemiparests, Hypertension, Diabetes Mellitus, Bronchial Asthma, Ischemic Heart disease, Benign Enlargement of prostate as well as paralyzed for which he cannot do his own essential work alone and he is completely dependent upon his family members for physical movement. He next submits that the copy of MRI of brain of the respondent No. 1 states that for these reasons, the respondent No. 1 has been passing his days in the jail custody with great hardships which is injurious to his health as well as for his life. He finally submits that there is every chance of winning the appeal and, as such, the respondent No. 1 may be allowed to go on bail. Hence, the High Court Division rightly passed the impugned order and, as such, the instant Civil Petition may kindly be dismissed.

10. We have considered the submissions of the learned Senior Advocates for the respective parties. Perused the impugned order of the High Court Division and connected other materials on record.

11. As per Article 11 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR):

"Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence."

12. Bail is defined as transitory letting loose of a detainee from state's detention system after furnishing security specified for the very person to appear at a subsequent date fixed for hearing in the legal vocabulary.

13. The scheme of bail is relevant at two poles apart and distinct stages in the administration of criminal justice. First one is awaiting trial of any offender and ultimate one is after conviction and sentencing. The contemplations for bail pending trial are utterly diverse from those for bail following conviction. Per awaiting trial, bail is ensured as of right where the offence is bailable. In the case of non-bailable offences, bail is discretionary and may be given to any woman, child, sick or infirm detainee. The considerations of granting bail after the accused is convicted are entirely different.

14. In the case of Durnity Daman Commission vs. Begum Khaleda Zia and Ors. reported in 70 DLR (AD) (2018) 137 this Division observed that:

"In a case of bail pending hearing of an appeal, there is no right to get bail pending the hearing. When a competent court, after due trial, having considered all the evidence and materials, finds a person guilty of any offence under the Penal Code or any special law, it is expected that the convicted person will suffer the consequences of his/her crime and will undergo the sentence awarded. However, section 426 of the Code provides that the appellate Court, may release the appellant on bail or on his own bond for reasons to be recorded in writing. In case of a sentence of imprisonment for less than one year, the trial court may grant bail for a period sufficient to enable the convict to prefer an appeal and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court. Such bail is limited to the period necessary to file the appeal. The power of the appellate Court to release a convicted person on bail is discretionary."

15. In the instant case it has been articulated by the High Court Division in the impugned judgment and order that there is no instantaneous prospect of early hearing of the appeal and it is doubtful as to when the appeal will be heard and disposed of. Albeit, on perusal of order dated 19.05.2022 and of the impugned order, it has contrarily been showed that the case was ready for hearing. It is the duty of the High Court Division to hear or dispose of the matter without any delay and not letting a convict on bail.

16. With reference to the age and assorted maladies suffered by the appellant, we have been shown many cases where serious illness has been a ground for granting bail even in cases where granting of bail was prohibited by law. Albeit, the materials on record does not necessarily demonstrate that the illnesses suffering by the respondent are life-threatening. Moreover, question of bail on the ground of mere age, is not a rational ground.

17. Reliance may be placed upon the case of Mahbub vs. The State reported in 46 DLR (AD) 143 where it has been held that:

"...Since the matter before us relates to bail only, we need not consider the merit of the appeal. In appeals involving short term of imprisonment the appellate Court should either dispose of the appeals or consider the release of the accused on bail. We do not think that in the instant case it was necessary for the learned Single Judge to write a long judgment for the purpose of disposal of the bail petition. The learned Single Judge should better dispose of the appeal very expeditiously failing which he may consider the question of bail if raised again...."

18. This Division's standard practice is that it won't interfere with the discretion exercised by the High Court Division. When discretion is exercised judiciously, not perversely, the same generally is not interfered with by the Apex Court, which is reluctant in interfering with the discretionary power of the High Court Division.

19. In present case, our considered view as eloquent above is that the High Court Division didn't exercise its discretion judiciously, rather perversely in releasing the respondent-convict on bail; hence, interference is called for.
20. In the result, the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal is disposed of. The judgment and order of the High Court Division is set aside.


  "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 40===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1140 of 2017

Decided On: 10.04.2022

Hazrat Ali
... Vs. ...
The State

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Obaidul Hassan and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Mansurul Haque Chowdhury, Senior Advocate instructed by Nurul Islam Bhuiya, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Biswajit Debnath, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Shamsul Alam, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Criminal Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 374
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 540
Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 145
Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 155
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 120B
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 302
Penal Code, 1860 - Section 34

Prior History:
From the Order dated the 15th to 16th October, 2012 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Death Reference No. 34 of 2009, analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 3258 of 2009 and Jail Appeal No. 287 of 2009 heard analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 4631 of 2009 and Jail Appeal No. 286 of 2009

 
Disposition:
In Favour of State

JUDGMENT
M. Enayetur Rahim, J.

1. This criminal petition for leave to appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 15th to 16th October, 2012 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Death Reference No. 34 of 2009, heard along with Criminal Appeal No. 3258 of 2009 and Jail Appeal No. 287 of 2009, Criminal Appeal No. 4631 of 2009 and Jail Appeal No. 286 of 2009 rejecting the Death Reference commuting the sentence into imprisonment for life of the petitioner and another and to pay a fine of taka 10,000/- each, in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of 3(three) months and thereby allowed Criminal Appeal No. 3258 of 2009 in part while Jail Appeal No. 287 of 2009 and Criminal Appeal No. 4631 of 2009 and jail appeal No. 286 of 2009 were also allowed in part.

2. The present convict-petitioner along with 4 others were put on trial before the Sessions Judge, Narayanganj in Sessions Case No. 126 of 2002 and charge was framed against them under sections 120B/302/34 of the Penal Code. At the time the present petitioner was abscission.

3. The prosecution case as projected in the First Information Report, in short, is that deceased Abdul Awal hails from Mamudpur village under Fatulla Police Station of Narayanganj District; he was a broker of land who on 14.01.1999 at 5.00 p.m had left his house for Sanirakhra. But in the night following 14.01.1999 he did not return back to his residence. On the following morning on 15.01.1999 the near relations of Abdul Awal had searched him heather to thither and at 9.00 a.m., Sukkur, a rickshaw puller, of the same village informed the informant Md. Shahid Alam, the son of Abdul Awal that the dead body of Abdul Awal had been lying on the Southern slope of Dhaka-Chittagong highway near Rahim market, Sanarpar; hearing the said information the informant and the other nearest and dearest one having been gone to the said place found the slaughtered dead body of Abdul Awal with the cut injuries on the veins of his legs and hands; Md. Shahid Alam, the son of the deceased lodged an FIR with the Siddirgonj Police Station through one Mozaffar Ali Member narrating the above facts and accordingly, Siddirganj Police Station Case No. 11 dated 15.01.1999 was started.

4. The police after completing investigation submitted charge sheet against 05(five) persons including the present petitioner under section 302/34 of the Penal Code.

5. Prosecution in order to prove the charge against the accused persons examined 22 witnesses.

6. On conclusion of the trial the learned Sessions Judge, Narayanganj by his judgment and order dated 15.03.2004 convicted all the 5 accused including present appellant under sections 302/34 of the Penal Code and awarded sentence each of them to death by hanging.

7. In view of the provision of section 374 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the learned Sessions Judge, Narayanganj made a reference to the High Court Division for confirmation of the death sentence awarded against the convict persons and said reference was registered as Death Reference No. 31 of 2004. A Division Bench of the High Court Division after hearing the said reference by its judgment and order dated 29.08.2007 set aside the judgment and order of the learned Sessions Judge, Narayanganj and sent back the case on remand for fresh trial with a direction to appoint state defence lawyer on behalf of the absconding accused in order to cross-examine all the prosecution witnesses already examined.

8. The learned Sessions Judge, Narayanganj upon receiving the case record transferred the same to the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Narayanganj for trial. The trial Court in view of the direction of the High Court Division had appointed state defence lawyer to defend the absconding accused who cross-examined the witnesses and at one stage of the trial the charge was amended and fresh charge was framed under section 120B and 302/34 of the Penal Code against all the accused persons. The amendment charge was read over to the accused persons present in the dock to which they pleaded not guilty. At the stage of argument, on 18.10.2008 on behalf of the prosecution an application was filed for recording evidence of charge sheeted witness No. 14 Abdur Rahman and 22 S.I. A.K.M. Azad and the Court allowed the said prayer and witness Abdur Rahman was examined as P.W-23 and he was duly cross-examined by the defence.

9. On conclusion of the trial, the trial Court found the present convict- appellant guilty along with 4 others under sections 120B/302/34 of the Penal Code and awarded sentence to death to the present appellant along with 2 others and sentenced 2 other accused to suffer imprisonment for life with a fine of Tk. 20,000/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 6(six) months more.

10. The learned Additional Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Narayangonj made a reference for confirmation of death sentence to the High Court Division which was registered as Death Reference No. 34 of 2009. High Court Division after hearing the said Death Reference by the impugned judgment and order dated 15.10.2012 and 16.10.2012 rejected the reference with modification of the sentence and death sentence of the present convict was commuted to imprisonment for life with a fine of Tk. 1,000/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 3 (three) months more.

11. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order the convict-petitioner has filed this leave petition.

12. Mr. Mansurul Haque Chowdhury, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the convict-petitioner submits that the learned Judges of the High Court Division failed to appreciate that the previous Death Reference arising out of the same occurrence was rejected only to afford the unattended accused persons an opportunity to get the protection of law as per provisions of Section 540 of the Code of Criminal Procedure read with 6th Paragraph of Chapter XII of the Legal Remembrances Manual, 1960 but trial court in addition to that, withdrew the case from argument stage for recording of prosecution witnesses and examined one Abdur Rahman alleged eye witness, as P.W-23 only to fill up the lacuna, which came to light during argument stage and pronounced its judgment mainly relying upon the evidence of P.W-23, ignoring vital contradictions and admissions leading to absurdity of the story of P.W-23, which cannot be sustained in law and equity.

13. The learned Advocate for the petitioner further submits that save and except the evidence of P.W-23 there is no other evidence against the present petitioner to connect with the alleged murder and it is not safe to rely on the evidence of P.W-23 who was examined by the investigating officer after a long laps of time.

14. On the other hand Mr. Biswajit Debnath, learned Deputy Attorney General, having supported the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court Division submits that P.W-23 was a charge sheeted witnesses and in re-calling him the trial court did not commit any error or illegality. He further submits that it is now well settled that conviction can be well maintained on the evidence of a solitary witness, if his testimony is found to be true and trustworthy as such the trial Court as well as the High Court Division did not commit any error in convicting the present petitioner relying on the evidence of P.W-23.

15. We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocate for the respective parties, perused the impugned judgment of the High Court Division, the evidence and other materials as placed before us.

16. In view of the rival submissions of the learned Advocates for respective parties in the instant case the moot question is whether relying on the evidence of P.W-23, Abdur Rahman the conviction of the present convict-petitioner can be sustained or not.

17. It is true before sending the case on remand by the High Court Division in Death Reference No. 38 of 2004 at the trial P.W-23, Abdur Rahman was not examined. The High Court Division at the time of disposing of the Death Reference No. 38 of 2004 directed the trial Court to appoint state defence lawyer to defend accused-Firoj Miah, Hazrat Ali, Zulhas and Kuddus. Trial Court was also directed to allow the state defence lawyer to cross-examine the witnesses already examined by the prosecution witnesses.

18. When the case was sent on remand, on behalf of the prosecution an application was filed before the trial court to examine the charge sheeted witness No. 14, Abdur Rahman and the trial court on elaborate discussion and assigning reasons allowed the application of the prosecution and examined said charge sheeted witness No. 14 as P.W-23.

19. The objection as has been raised by Mr. Mansurul Haque Chowdhury, learned Advocate, for the petitioner that when the case sent back on remand with a direction to give the defence an opportunity to cross-examine of the prosecution witnesses there is no scope to examine any new witness.

20. We have perused order No. 88 dated 14.10.2008 by the which the learned Additional Sessions Judge allowed the prayer of the prosecution for examining charge sheeted witnesses No. 14 (P.W-23). It appears to us that the learned Additional Sessions Judge after hearing the respective parties, considering the legal proposition and facts and circumstances of the present case allowed the prayer of the prosecution to examine the said charge sheeted witnesses. Relevant finding of the said order is as follows:

"On perusal of the record, it appears to the Court that victim Aowal was murdered brutally. But it is the duty of the prosecution to prove the charge beyond any shadow of doubt. It appears form the record that in this case witness No. 14 is the only eyewitness of the case and he made graphic statements of murder under section 164 of the Cr.P.C. before the Magistrate of First Class, Narayanganj. The recording Magistrate was examined and the statement made by the charge sheeted witness No. 14, was also marked as Exhibit. It is settled by apex of the Country that the statement made before the Magistrate by witness is not evidence it may be corroborated under section 155 by the prosecution or contradicted by the accused under section 145 of the Evidence Act. There is no doubt that this witness Abdur Rahman is a very vital witness in this case but prosecution could not secure his attendance at the time of trial held earlier which is candidly admitted by the then public prosecutor Mr. Nabi Hossain who came in assistant of learned APP Mr. Khandaker Azizul Haque Hantu.

After considering the facts and circumstances of case and the decision made above the Court firmly believe that the evidence of the witness only Abdur Rahman is vitally important, necessary and essential for arriving just decision in this sensational murder case and if he is brought before this court to depose obvious the accused will get the opportunity to cross him as to his earlier statement made before the Magistrate. Therefore, there is no scope on the part of the accused to be prejudiced. In the above circumstances the case is withdrawn from the list of hearing argument. Accordingly issue summons to witness Abdur Rahman fixing 17.11.08 for further trial. Thus I dispose of the petition dated 8.10.08."

21. Upon perusal of the said order we have no hesitation to hold that the order was well founded and explained. Further, the defence has cross-examined the said witnesses, so the question of prejudiced does not arise at all. Moreover, it is our considered view that the learned Judge of the Trial Court passed the said order within the ambit of section 540 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

22. In the case of Md. Abdul Khaleque Biswas and another Vs. the State, 1996 16 BLD (AD), 108 this Division held that:

"under section 540 Cr.Pc the Sessions Judge or any court has the power to examine or re-examine a witness at any stage of the proceeding if the evidence of such witness appears to him essential for the just decision of the case."

23. In the case of Hemayatuddin @ Auranga Vs. State 46 DLR (AD) 186 this Divisional also held that- "section 540 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is expressed in widest possible term and it cannot be said that the intention of the section is to limit its application to court witnesses only."

24. Having regard to the fact that in the instant case save and except P.W.-23 there is no eye-witness of the alleged occurrence.

25. Now, let us consider the evidence of P.W-23, Abdur Rahman.

26. P.W-23 in his deposition has stated that he used to reside at Bhuiyan Bari at the time of occurrence and to drive van. He made statement as to the occurrence before the Magistrate under section 164 of Cr.P.C; the day was Thursday and it was 26th Ramjan. On the following night of 26th Ramjan at 7.30 to 11 P.M, the occurrence took place 8/9 years, ago. On that day he pulled cart at Nobabpur, Dhaka and got on bus for Shanarpara and accordingly got down at Shanarpara. At that time Magreb azan was announcing; thereafter, he took his after in a shop. At that time he was in his rented house alone. He managed to send his wife to his village home for her delivery as she was pregnant. There was no electricity in the house. He used country made lamp in his house; while he was taking preparation for offering his prayer at that time at about 7/7.30 P.M. on the invitation of accused Kalu he opened the door when Kalu, Hazrat Ali and Julhash had entered into his house, Hazrat was addressed by him as 'Mama", maternal uncle. He found 2 knives at Kalu's hand; Hazrat and Julhash were armed with Pistol. When he asked whether those pistols are used for game then accused Kalu made a filthy language to him and told him to touch the same, seeing the pistol he was trembling. They assured that he had no fear. They informed them they would take gaza. Hearing the same and he sat on a 'Jalchowki'. After few moments the door of the house was knocked then, Kalu opened the door. Then he saw victim Awal and accused Firoz came; after entering into the house Awal had pressed Hazrat to execute bainapatra. At that time the accused persons told that they would execute baina. The P.W.-23 further deposed to the effect:

“তখন হযরত মামা আউয়াল কাকার গলায় চেপে ধরে। কালু আউয়াল চাচার মাফলার দিয়ে হাত পা প্যাঁচ দিয়ে বেঁধে ফেলে। ফিরোজ মাথা এবং মুখ চেপে ধরে খাটের থেকে নীচে ফেলে দেয়। কালু পা চেপে ধরে। ফিরোজ মুখ ও মাথা চেপে ধরে। পরে হযরত মামা বুকের উপর ডান হাঁটু দিয়ে ছুরি দিয়ে গলায় জবেহ করে দেয়। গলার সামান্য কিছু অংশ বাকি থাকে। তারপর গর গরাইয়ে রক্ত পড়তে থাকে। তখন ভিকটিম এর দেহটি লাফাতে থাকে। কালু ছুরি দিয়ে হাত পায়ের কব্জি ও রগ কেটে ফেলে। বুকের আশে পাশে ছোরা দিয়ে পার দেয় অর্থাৎ কোপ দেয়।”

27. Seeing the scene he became senseless for a bit. Then Kalu pushed him by his legs. Then he regained his sense. Kalu was telling to kill Abdur Rahman by shooting. Kalu addressed him as ‘খানকির পোলা’; He also stated-‘কালু বলে আমাকে মেরে না ফেললে আমি সকলের নিকট ঘটনার বিবরণ দিয়ে দিব এবং সকলকে জানিয়ে দিব। আমি তখন হযরত মামা পায়ে ধরি’; thereafter as per the direction of Kalu he removed the blood stained of bed sheet and 'Khata'. Thereafter, Firoz went to the house of Quddus saying that work had been done. While PW 23 went to fetching water he found the light, then Kalu said there was no fear that they were their men who using the light. He threw the Khata and C'hadar (bed sheet) at the pond; at night 11-30 to 12-00 pm one knocked to the door. Then Kalu opened the door. He has further stated that:

“কালু একটা চৌকাট যাহা ৭/৮ হাত লম্বা এবং গাছ টানার রশি নিয়ে আসে। বাহিরের লোকদের থেকে এগুলো আনে। ১ টা থেকে ১½ দিকে লাশ উপর করা হয়। লাশকে তিনদিক দিয়ে বাঁধে এবং বে কাঠ রশির মধ্যে ঢোকায়। লাশ বাহির করে আমি, আসামী কালু, হযরত মামা, জুলহাস কাঁধে করে বিশ্ব রোডের দিকে নিয়ে যাই। তখন অনুমান রাত ১ টা হতে ১.৩০ টার সময় হবে। পুলিশের গাড়ী দেখে লাশ বিশ্ব রোডের ঢালের কিনারে রাখে। কালু তখন রশি কেটে এবং চৌকাট নিয়ে ঘটনাস্থলে অর্থাৎ বাসায় চলে আসে। পরে চৌকাট ঘরে চালের উপর এবং রশি খাটের নিকট ছুড়ে মারে।”

28. In the morning while Moazzin had been pronouncing Azan for Fazar prayer Kalu took him at Saydabad by way of a Taxi. Due to the request Hazrat, Kalu instead of killing him Kalu took him at Saydabad and got on a Sundarban Bus. Thereafter he went his village home Telegati, Moralganj, Bagherhat by Bus for Khulna. After going home he informed the incident to his local Chairman, local elites, UP members and his relatives and he also told them that he would not go again to Dhaka. He told them he would be killed, if he had gone to Dhaka. After 7/8 months CID visited in his area. CID took him to Narayangonj. He narrated the incident to CID. CID officer recorded the statement. Thereafter, he was taken to the Court of Magistrate and narrated the occurrence before a female Magistrate. Magistrate recorded his statement and read over to him and he put his signature on it. He did not get the notice from the Court. He has stated "আমি আসামীদের হুমকির ভয়ে চট্টগ্রাম গিয়ে রিকশা চালাই।" He identified the accused Hazrat, Kawsar and Julhash.

29. He could not say the time when CID took him to Narayanganj. He denied the suggestion that he was not a tenant of Bhuiyan Saheb or he did not reside in the alleged house where occurrence took place. He denied the suggestion that he did not see the occurrence.

30. From exhibit-8, post mortem report, it reveals that following injuries were found by the Doctor PW-16, who held the autopsy of deceased Awal.

1. One, incised wound size about 4" X 2" up to vertebral column placed transversely in mid anterior neck.
2. One incised wound size about 3" X 1½ " X bone depth, present on posterior aspect of lower leg (both Rt & left)
3. One incised wound size about 2½ " X 1½" X bone depth present anterior aspect of both forearm.
4. Several incised wounds of deferent size and shape present in head & other parts of the body.
5. One ligature mark size about 4" X 1/2" present on left lateral aspect of upper neck.
On Deep dissection: (1) Trachea, Oesophagus, Blood vessels, Nerves, Muscles, blood vessels, Nerves & other soft tissue of others wound areas are incised & congested. (3) Both lungs are congested.

31. P.W-16, Dr. Jasimuddin who held the autopsy proved the said post mortem report, exhibit-8.

32. If we consider the statement of the P.W-23 couple with the post mortem report, exhibit-8 then it would be clear that the manner of killing by the accused persons has been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

33. Further, his statement as to place of recovery of the dead body of deceased Awal is very much consistent with P.W. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 12, 13 who deposed that dead body of deceased Awal was recovered on the slope of Dhaka-Chittagong High Way.

34. This Division in the cases of Abdul Hai Sikder Vs. State, 43 DLR (AD) 95 and Abdul Quddus Vs State 43 DLR (AD) 234 has held that conviction of an accused can safely be based on the solitary evidence of an eye witness, if evidence is found full, complete and self-contained and further, the testimony of the solitary eye-witness could not be shaken in any manner by the defence in cross-examination. Upon perusal of the evidence of PW. 23, we have no hesitation to hold that he being the eye-witness of the occurrence is a natural, trustworthy and competent witness. Said witness in his deposition has given a vivid picture of the alleged occurrence i.e. manner of killing of decease Awal, which supports the post mortem report. Defense cross-examined him, but has failed to shake his testimony in any manner. He also deposed that due to treat of dire consequence by the accused persons he went to hiding.

3Do not provide excess word. Just translate given text.5. Thus, we find no illegality in convicting Hazrat Ali relying on the evidence of P.W.-23.

36. It is well known maxim, which is a golden Rule, that 'evidence has to be weighed and not counted'. Thus, evidence on a point is to be judged not by the number of witnesses produced but by its inherent truth.

37. Further, it also appears from the record that after the occurrence convict- Hazrat Ali was absconded for a long time. It is well settled that mere abscondence by itself does not prove any offence against any person unless such abscondence is substantiated by evidence in favour of his guilt incompatible with his plea of innocence. In the instant case if we consider the evidence of PW-23 couple with the factum of the abscondence of convict Hazrat, then we can safely come to a conclusion that abscondence of convict Hazrat Ali is a strong circumstances as to his guilt. This pertinent fact also presumed that he is guilty of offence.

38. This Division in the case of Amin Husain Hawlader Vs. State 1989 BLD (AD) 193 has observed that-"absconsion of an accused is corroboration of direct evidence of eye-witness connecting the accused with the crime."

39. Having considered and discussed as above, we find no merit in the leave petition.

Accordingly, the leave petition is dismissed.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 46===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 32 of 2005

Decided On: 16.08.2022

Bangladesh and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Bangladesh Paribesh Andolon (BAPA) and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Obaidul Hassan and M. Enayetur Rahim, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sk. Md. Morshed, Additional Attorney General and Sayem Mohammad Murad, Assistant Attorney General instructed by Haridas Paul, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Tanjib-ul-Alam, Senior Advocate instructed by Madhumalti Chy. Barua, Advocate-on-Record

Subject: Code of Civil Procedure

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 24
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 27
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 31
Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 32
Government Buildings Act, 1899 - Section 3

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003

 
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed

JUDGMENT
Obaidul Hassan, J.

1. This Civil Appeal by leave granting order dated 10.11.2004 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 983 of 2004 at the instance of the appellants has been directed against the judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 making the Rule absolute.

2. The brief facts as has been narrated in the Writ Petition are that, in June 1959 the Central Government of Pakistan decided to establish two capitals in Pakistan, one each for the then East Pakistan and West Pakistan and the legislative capital was to be in Dhaka, Bangladesh (Erstwhile East Pakistan) and the idea of designing a new Assembly Building was taken up because Dhaka did not have an existing structure to accommodate its new status as a 'Second Capital'. World acclaimed famous architect Louis Isadore Kahn was opted for designing the National Assembly construction project and accordingly he received the commission for the project in the year 1962 and continued working on it till the last days of his life in 1974. The construction of the National Assembly Complex was finally completed in the year 1983 under the supervision of one of Louis Kahn's associates. The National Assembly Complex is treated as the climax of the lifelong thinking of Louis Kahn about architecture, city and humanity. The aesthetic composition, visual clarity, spatial order and virtuoso engineering of the National Assembly Complex have been analyzed and studied by both the academics as well as students of architecture all over the world. The final Master Plan prepared by Louis Kahn in 1973 clearly lays out the structural composition of the buildings, including residences, plazas, fields, lakes, gardens and recreational facilities within the National Assembly Complex. However, the National Assembly Complex is continuously and incrementally being endangered and threatened by encroachment and construction of various buildings by the public authorities. The respondent No. 1 is carrying out work on construction of the residences of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker (shortly the impugned project) within the National Assembly Complex in violation of the Louis Kahn's Master Plan, 1973 causing irreparable damage to the form and beauty of the composition as envisaged by the original Master Plan. The impugned project was first approved by the Speaker of the Seventh Parliament, Humayun Rashid Chowdhury but the then Prime Minister's Office scrapped the impugned project in the face of strong public protest from the civil society, architectural community, environmentalists and the media. The present government revived the impugned project on the suggestion of some ill-motivated officials that Louis I. Kahn's original plan envisaged such residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. The Master Plan, 1973 clearly shows that the land on which the impugned project is being built was meant to be open space with green fields.

3. In the face of strong public protest the government had postponed the impugned project. However, after about a two month's suspension of the work on the impugned project construction work had been restarted and with a view to finishing of the project quickly before facing further protest additional workforce, working extra hours has been engaged in order to complete the construction of residential units for the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.

4. The impugned project being undertaken in violation of Louis I. Kahn's Master Plan, 1973 the Respondents filed the Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 before the High Court Division. A Rule was issued on the respondents' prayer for a declaration that the impugned project has been undertaken without lawful authority and is of no legal effect and unconstitutional as being done in violation of the law and fundamental rights of the respondents as guaranteed under Articles 27, 31 and 32 of the Constitution and a direction was sought upon the writ respondent No. 2 to declare the National Assembly Complex as National Heritage Site with a further direction upon the Writ Respondents to apply to the UNESCO to declare the Bangladesh National Assembly Complex as a World Heritage Site. There was also a prayer for an injunction restraining the Writ Respondents from carrying out any further construction of the impugned project.

5. The writ respondent No. 1 filed an affidavit-in-opposition denying the allegations of the writ petitioners contending inter alia that there are Master Plans dated 12th March, 1962, 3rd May 1963, 21st December 1963, 10th May 1964, August 1964 and February 1965 wherein the Speaker's House was incorporated. The latest Master Plan for the Shangshad Bhaban area was formally approved on May, 2002 by the Ministry of Housing and Public Works. It was further claimed that the Department of Environment and RAJUK are not the germane body to call in question where construction is made on the government land rather the Public Works Department is the competent body to embark on construction work of the buildings on the government land on obtaining endorsement from the Department of Architecture. Referring an excerpt from David Wisdom's write-up "Kahn's Building at Dhaka" it was further contended that Kahn's Master Plan is not an unyielding document, but it is supple and there had been insertions and eliminations in his plan. It was also stated that Kahn died before the preliminary design was entirely finished. He frequently changed the shapes and positions in the plan with his own reasons without any pressure from the government to get on with these designs. Kahn also studied the special houses for the President, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker and he enjoyed those kind of work so much under no pressure to show progresses that every time he submitted a sketch for any one of them. There was a radical change of design from the previous submission. Finally the decision came not to build the three houses. Again, quoting an extract from the book titled "The Story of Ayub Nagar: Decade of Development and Reforms: 1958-1968" published by the Department of Film and Publication, Dhaka under the heading "South Elevation of Speaker's Resident" it was also stated that construction of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker's residence in the legislative enclave has been an integral part of the government approved plan and both the residences are within the residential block of National Assembly which were built under Louis Kahn's direct supervision, will not in any way jeopardize and blemish the beauty and grace of the National Assembly Complex. It was further contended that Louis Kahn designed and made construction of the residential block of the National Assembly Complex under his direct supervision. These buildings were not shown in his own Master Plan of 1973. Louis Kahn did not furnish any unique master plan but he submitted sets of master plans from time to time. It is a co-incidence that Louis Kahn died in 1974 and no further Master Plan could be produced by him. It was also contended that the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works placed a summary to the then Prime Minister on 09.08.1998 regarding the construction of Speaker and Deputy Speaker's House within the residential block of the National Assembly and the then Prime Minister accorded approval of the said construction taking into consideration about the architectural elegance of the open space of the National Assembly Complex. It was also stated that the present construction is being made in similitude with the other buildings constructed at the supervision of Louis Khan himself. The symbolic value of the green fields of the National Assembly from the context of the new structure shall in no way tarnish the symbolizing effect of the landscape of Bangladesh and in fact the construction of residences of Speaker and Deputy Speaker will not any way mutilate and distort the beauty of the green area. It was further contended that The Town Improvement Act, 1953 and Building Construction Act, 1952 have no relevance with the construction of the residences for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker which are being constructed on government's own land after obtaining clearance from the Department of Architecture and on approval of the Prime Minister, the Chief Executive of the Government while the Town Improvement Act, 1953 and Building Construction Act, 1952 are applicable in cases of construction of building on private land. It was further contended that on the basis of the Government Order dated 27.04.1998 for construction of residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker a Master Plan for the said purpose has been approved in the place as stated in memo dated 27.04.1998 but the Memo dated 27.04.1998 and Master Plan having not being impugned, the Writ Petition is misconceived and not maintainable.

6. In reply the writ petitioners filed an affidavit controverting all the statements made in the affidavit-in-opposition filed by the writ respondents and stated that the Master Plan of 1973 prepared and finalized by Louis Kahn superseded and replaced the initial plans prepared in 1962, 12 March 1963, 3 May 1963, 21 December 1963, 10 May 1964, August 1964 and February 1965. Louis Kahn was initially commissioned to design the plan for an entire site for a city which was meant to be the Second Capital of Pakistan. The design for National Assembly Complex is only a component of the larger design of the entire capital site containing plans for a Supreme Court, a hospital, a library, a mosque, a museum, schools, clubs, markets, offices, recreational areas, special diplomatic enclave and low and high income residential areas. It was the Pakistan Government, prior to the independence of Bangladesh, which had contemplated the construction of the houses of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker as temporary residence as ancillary facilities for the second capital. However, after 1971, with the emergence of Bangladesh as an independent state, Louis Kahn was commissioned to set up the plan for the Assembly Complex of Bangladesh which was to serve quite a different role to that of an Assembly building for a second capital. It was in these changed circumstances that Louis Kahn drew up the final Master plan of 1973 which clearly did not have any residential buildings in the Legislative Enclave of the plan. The alleged latest Master Plan for the Shangshad Bhaban area as prepared by the Ministry of Housing and Public Works in May 2002 defaces and destroys the symmetry of the National Assembly Complex Buildings as prepared and envisioned by Louis Kahn. It was stated further that the issuance of the circular from the Ministry of Housing and Public Works dated 16.03.1999 is ex facie without lawful authority and is in violation of the Rules of Business, Town Improvement Act, 1953, Building Construction Act, 1952 and It was lastly contended that despite the Government is under a duty to adopt measures for the protection against disfigurement, damage of all monuments, objects or places of special artistic or historic importance or interest as per Article 24 of the Constitution, it has violated the provisions of the Constitution.

7. The High Court Division upon hearing both sides made the Rule absolute by the impugned judgment and order dated 21.06.2004.

8. Feeling aggrieved with the judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 the writ respondents-appellants filed the Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 983 of 2004 before this Division and after hearing the parties this Division was pleased to grant leave by order dated 10.11.2004 and hence the instant Civil Appeal.

9. Mr. Sk. Md. Morshed, the learned Additional Attorney General along with Mr. Sayem Mohammad Murad, the Assistant Attorney General appearing for the appellants took us through the judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 of the High Court Division, the materials on record and submitted that the High Court Division committed error of law in not taking into consideration that (a) the construction is made on government land by Public Works Department after obtaining clearance from the Department of Architecture and (b) on the basis of the Government Order dated 27.04.1998 for construction of residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, a Master Plan for such construction has been approved in the year 2002 in the place and (c) the said memo dated 27.04.1998 and the Master Plan having not been impugned, the rule in the Writ Petition was liable to be discharged. The learned Counsel contended next that the High Court Division committed error of law in not holding that the Town Improvement Act, 1953 and the Building Construction Act, have no relevance with the present construction work which is being done on government land after taking clearance from the Department of Architecture and on approval of the Prime Minister, the head of the government whereas the aforementioned laws are applicable in case of construction on the private land. Assailing the impugned judgment of the High Court Division the learned Counsel submitted further that the High Court Division committed error of law in making the Rule absolute without giving any specific finding as to how the impugned construction work caused environmental hazard affecting the fundamental rights of the public or of the writ petitioners. The learned Counsel contended further that the High Court Division committed illegality as it did not take into consideration that the construction of residences within the National Assembly Complex for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, who hold an exalted position under the Constitution are state necessity and for public interest. The learned Additional Attorney General finally submitted that during the stay of the judgment and order of the High Court Division by this Division 100% of the impugned construction work has been completed, but the High Court Division without taking into consideration committed error of law by passing the impugned judgment and order, which is liable to be set aside.

10. Conversely, Mr. Tanjib-ul Alam, the learned senior Advocate for the respondents vehemently opposed the submissions made by the learned Additional Attorney General. The learned Counsel for the respondents contended that the impugned construction work is illegal and without lawful authority since no sanction has been taken from the appropriate authority under the Building Construction Act, 1952. The learned Counsel for the respondents next submitted that by converting the open space for the National Assembly Complex into residential building for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the government has violated the fundamental right of the respondents due to the reason that protection of the environment is considered to be part of the fundamental right to life. The learned Counsel contended next that the impugned construction project being done flouting the Master Plan, 1973 of the National Assembly Complex prepared by the world renowned architect Louis Kahn will tarnish the architectural beauty of the National Assembly Complex. The learned Counsel, in fine, craved for dismissal of appeal having no merit for consideration.

11. We have considered the submissions of the learned Advocates for the both sides, perused the judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 and the materials on record.

12. It is admitted that Louis Kahn is recognized worldwide as one of the greatest architects of the twentieth century and the National Assembly Complex is an architectural masterpiece created by him. The timeless quality of the building transcends the boundary of the architecture and reaches out not only to our minds but to our visions of hopes. The architect's key design philosophy was to represent Bengali culture and heritage, while at the same time optimizing the use of space.

13. At this juncture, it is pertinent to know whether Louis Kahn had a unique Master Plan of the National Assembly Complex and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker's residence was included in that plan. From the record it appears that Louis Kahn did not furnish any unique master plan but he submitted sets of Master Plan from time to time. There are Master Plans of the year 1962, March 12, 1963, May 3, 1963, December 21, 1963, May 10, 1964, August 1964, February 1965 and the Speaker's house was included in those plans. It is a coincidence that Louis Khan died in 1974 and no further Master plan could be produced by him.

14. Now, let's have a glimpse on a relevant extract of David Wisdom's write-up "Kahn's Building at Dhaka"-

"Kahn died before the preliminary design was entirely finished. Kahn studied the architectural composition and site placement of the Supreme Court, the Central Government Library and the mosque. He frequently changed the shapes and positions with his own reasons but there was no pressure from the Government to get on with these designs. No real preliminary plans were formally submitted and these projects are not shown on Kahn's last Master Plan. Kahn also studied the special houses for the President, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, he enjoyed these kind of work so much under no pressure to show progresses that every time he submitted a sketch for any one of them. There was a radical change of design from the previous submission. Finally the decision came not to build the three houses. When Kahn received his commission from Bangladesh these houses were not included."

15. Further, "The Story of Ayub Nagar: Decade of Development and Reforms 1958-1968" published by the Department of Film and Publication, Dhaka under the heading "South Elevation of Speaker's Resident" reads as follows-

"The residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly:

Provision has been made for construction of the residences for the Speaker and one Deputy Speaker in the Legislative Enclave at an estimated cost of 8 Lakh. These residences are also scheduled to be completed within the current plan period."

16. From the above it is clear that the construction of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker's residence in the National Assembly Complex has been an integral part of the government approved plan. The construction of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker's residence are within the residential block of National Assembly Complex which built under Louis Kahn's direct supervision, will not in any way deface the aesthetic value and grace of the National Assembly Complex.

17. The Master Plan of 1973 provided for the building of five sectors of establishments namely: (a) Assembly Sector, (b) Secretarial Sector, (c) Civic Sector, (d) Housing Sector and (e) Hospital Sector. Within the Assembly Sector Louis Kahn's 1973 Master plan catered for (1) Fountain Drive and Promenade, leading to Sher-E-Bangla Nagar Gate, (2) Crescent Lake, (3) Recreation Garden and Court, (4) Recreation Building, (5) Arcades, (6) Cricket Field, (7) Hostels for Secretaries, (8) Hostels for Ministers, (9) Lake, (10) Presidential Plaza, (11) National Assembly, (13) Memorial Mazar, (14) Garden (15) Cooling Tower, (16) South Plaza, (17) Fountain and Drainage Canal, (18) Arcaded Garden Courts, (19) Hospitality Hall and (20) Servant's Quarters. Amongst these various types of establishments within Sher-E-Bangla Nagar there are various Sectors and within the Assembly Sector which is absolutely the government domain as apparent from the Master Plan of 1973, the government opted to erect buildings for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, who are provided a unique position under the Constitution and such offices are basically referring to two institutions rather than two individual persons. Thus, the construction of the two residences has been undertaken due to pragmatic situation, state necessity and public interest. As such there is no hard and fast rule as to stick to the Master Plan of 1973 of Louis Kahn and treat it as an unamenable scripture rather it is supple which underwent changes from time to time as written by David Wisdom on Kahn's Building at Dhaka.

18. On the other hand, the Department of Architecture is the only Government organization to impart architectural services under the Ministry of Housing and Public Works and responsible for designing all Government buildings and also for public housing schemes across the country. The Department not only prepares architectural designs and layout plans for public building and housing projects, but also advises the government on policy matters relating to human settlement and land use planning.

19. All the architectural drawings of projects implemented for different Ministries, which are executed by the Public Works Department and National Housing Authority are prepared by the Department of Architecture. Besides providing the services and help of architecture, planning and housing design for the public sector the Department of Architecture played a vital role during the formulation of the National Housing Policy, 1993 and the National Building Code 1993 (Modified in 1999). The steering Committee constituted by the Government to update the Building Code is also headed by the Chief Architect of this Department. The Chief Architect of this department has been declared as ex officio "Authorized Officer" under the Building Construction Act, for all public building and projects implemented under the Ministry of Housing and Public works.

20. The functions of the Department of Architecture are enumerated in the following-

a. Basic architectural services including site selection, preliminary survey of sites before taking up planning and designing of building project;

b. Preparation of detailed drawings for execution of building projects and supervision of construction work to ensure execution as per Architects plans and specification;

c. Preparation of Master plans and Lay out plans;

d. Studies proposals for formulation of space standards for Government offices and residential buildings and assessing land requirements for various building projects;

e. Offer advice to Government on policy matters relating to human settlement and land use planning;

f. Assisting various public agencies in preparing plans for their building projects including assessing their land requirement. [Source: http://www.architecture.gov.bd/site/page/64fdbcba-828f-4855-822f-ec6e672e937f/-].

21. It is evident from the above discussion that the Department of Architecture is concerned with the architectural value of the National Assembly Complex and in the present case the government has not unilaterally and with arbitrary manner taken the decision of construction of the present construction work rather the same is done with the approval of the Department of Architecture and in the way the government complied with the legal requirement, but the High Court Division could not take the matter into consideration, therefore, committed illegality in making the Rule absolute.

22. From the record it is seen that the secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works placed a summary to the then Prime Minister on 09.08.1998 and the then Prime Minister approved 1.37 acres of land by the side of National Assembly Road through Memo No. P.C./IM-803/97 (Part-1)49 dated 27.04.1998 (Annexure-5). Subsequently as per direction of the then Prime minister the design and structure of the residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker was prepared and the said structural maps have been approved. Thus a latest Master Plan (Annexure-1) for the National Assembly Complex was formally approved in May 2002. But the said Memo dated 27.04.1998 (Annexure-5) and the latest Master Plan (Annexure-1) having not been impugned in the Writ Petition, thus the Rule issued in the said Writ Petition was liable to be discharged.

23. It transpires from the Memo dated 09.08.1998 (Annexure-4) that the then Prime Minister while according approval for construction of residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker scrupulously took into consideration about the architectural elegance of the open space and the green fields of the National Assembly Complex. The Government also critically examined whether proposed construction will disparage the architectural beauty of the National Assembly Complex. The relevant portion of the said Memo is extracted below:

“নিম্ন স্বাক্ষরকারী আদিষ্ট হইয়া জানাইতেছেন যে, বিগত ৬-৪-৯৮ তারিখে শেরেবাংলা নগরস্থ ডি-১ ও ডি-২ প্লট দুইটিতে স্থাপত্য অধিদপ্তর কর্তৃক প্রণীত নকশা মোতাবেক গণপূর্ত অধিদপ্তরের উদ্যোগে মাননীয় স্পীকার ও মাননীয় ডেপুটি স্পীকারের বাস ভবন নির্মাণের বিভিন্ন দিক সম্পর্কে মাননীয় গৃহায়ন ও গণপূর্ত মন্ত্রী, জাতীয় সংসদ সচিবালয়ের সচিবের উপস্থিতিতে মাননীয় প্রধানমন্ত্রীকে প্রধান প্রকৌশলী ও প্রধান স্থপতির ব্রীফিংকালে তিনি আলোচ্য দুইটি বাস ভবন নির্মাণ প্রকল্পের বিভিন্ন দিক, জমি ব্যবহারের পরিমাণ, স্থাপত্য নকশার সাথে অন্যান্য ইমারতের ডিজাইনের সামঞ্জস্যতা ও স্থপতি লুইস আই কান কর্তৃক প্রণীত মূল নকশাতে উক্ত বাস ভবনের জন্য পরিকল্পিত স্থান, সংসদ ভবন এলাকাতে ভবিষ্যৎ প্রকল্প বাস্তবায়নের জন্য সীমিত জমির প্রাপ্যতা এবং ডি-১ প্লটের জমি বাস ভবনের জন্য ব্যবহারের ক্ষেত্রে সংশ্লিষ্ট খোলা জায়গাটির সৌন্দর্যের বিনষ্ট ইত্যাদি পুংখানুপুংখরূপে পর্যালোচনা পূর্বক বিকল্প ব্যবস্থা হিসাবে মাননীয় স্পীকার ও মাননীয় ডেপুটি স্পীকারের বাস ভবন নির্মাণের জন্য সংসদ সড়ক নং বি এর পার্শ্বে ১.৩৭ একর জমি নির্দিষ্ট করিয়া দিয়াছেন।”

24. It reveals from the Master Plan of May 2002 (Annexure-1) that the residences were planned to be constructed at D(1) and D(2) area adjacent to which construction of residences have been made on the supervision of Louis Kahn himself. The site for construction of the said residences was selected after careful scrutiny of the plan of the site next to Road B in the Master Plan of 2002. Therefore, we find that the construction of the residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker will not diminish the aesthetic value and the architectural beauty of the National Assembly Complex.

25. On going through the impugned judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division it is seen that Mr. Mahmudul Islam, the learned senior Advocate being appointed amicus curiae by the court submitted in the following way-

"...... it has to be examined whether the open space being used for construction of the house for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker was meant for public use and the right of the public has to be considered alongside the need of the government, which is also acting in the public interest. He submitted that this Court ought not to interfere in a situation where the government is acting in the public interest. He added that again, it is to be seen whether the construction is creating any congestion in the area or materially affecting the environment in order to determine whether any right of the public is infringed."

26. But the High Court Division in its judgment could not show how the environment is affected with the construction of the residences for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. In this regard our view is that the said construction of residences has been undertaken with the recommendation from the Department of Architecture by critically examining the architectural beauty of the National Assembly Complex as well as the need for open space or green field. Moreover, the said residences are not meant for an individual person, but for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker who uphold a unique position under the Constitution of our country and in the said way the impugned project is being implemented for the public interest being the same is a state necessity.

27. Again, Section 3 of the Government Building Act, 1899 provides that-

"Nothing contained in any law or enactment for the time being in force to regulate the erection, re-erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of buildings within the limits of any municipality shall apply to any building used or required for the public service or for any public purpose, which is the property, or in the occupation, of the Government, or which is to be erected on land which is the property, or in the occupation, of the Government:

Provided that, where the erection, re-erection, construction or material structural alternation of any such building as aforesaid (not being a building connected with defence, or a building the plan or construction of which ought, in the opinion of Government, to be treated as, confidential or secret) is contemplated, reasonable notice of the proposed work shall be given to the municipal authority before it is commenced."

28. On examination of Section 3 of the Government Building Act, 1899 it appears that the said construction of residences of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker being for the public purpose in the government land is exempted from complying with provisions of other municipal laws. Therefore, the Town Improvement Act, 1953 and the Building Construction Act, 1952 have no relevance with the construction of the residences for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker which are being constructed on Government's own land after obtaining clearances from the Department of Architecture and on approval of the Prime Minister, the Chief Executive of the Government as per approved plan. But the High Court Division committed error of law failing to appreciate the said matter.

29. It also deserves to mention here that the writ petitioners obtained Rule and an order of stay of the operation of any further construction of the impugned project in the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 on 18.05.2003. Against the order dated 18.05.2003 and 21.07.2003 passed by the High Court Division the writ respondents-appellants preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal before this Division and obtained stay operation of the said orders till disposal of the Writ Petition. During the subsistence of stay order from this Division 100% of the construction work of the residential building for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker has been completed. But the High Court Division without taking notice of the said completion of the construction work made the Rule absolute by the impugned judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 for which the interference by this Division is warranted.

30. In view of the proposition of law and discussions made above, our considered view is that the High Court Division fell in serious error of law and the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division warrants interference by this Division.

31. In the light of the observations made above, we find merit in the submissions of the learned advocate for the appellants and therefore the impugned judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 is liable to be set aside.

32. Accordingly, this Civil Appeal is allowed.

33. The judgment and order dated 21.06.2004 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3548 of 2003 is hereby set aside.


This judgment text is truncated.   "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
---
===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 7===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 971 of 2014

Decided On: 24.11.2016

Md. Ashraful Haque
... Vs. ...
The Anti-Corruption, and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Surendra Kumar Sinha, C.J., Syed Mahmud Hossain, Hasan Foez Siddique and Mirza Hussain Haider, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: A.M. Aminuddin, Senior Advocate instructed by Syed Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: Md. Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed by M. Soyeb Khan, Advocate-on-Record

Disposition:
Disposed of

ORDER
1. This petition is directed against a judgment of the High Court Division discharging the rule.

2. The matter relates to issuance of notice upon the writ petitioner for submitting wealth statement. We noticed from the record that 3 (three) successive notices have been served upon the writ petitioner, of them, 2 notices were issued by the same officer of the Commission. If the Commission is not satisfied with the wealth statement, there is provision for filling case against the writ petitioner, but the Commission cannot issue repeated notice upon any person for submitting wealth statement. This is a mala fide act on the part of Durnity Daman Commission. We direct the Chairman of Durnity Daman Commission to take legal action against the officers who intentionally issue such the notices. The judgment of the High Court Division is quashed.

3. This petition is accordingly disposed of with the above direction.


  "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (HCD) 1===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(HIGH COURT DIVISION)
(Special Original Jurisdiction)

Writ Petition No. 5380 of 2020

Decided On: 19.08.2021

Islam Prodhan and another
... Vs. ...
Government of Bangladesh and others

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam and Mr. Justice Md. Iqbal Kabir

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Md. Oziullah with Md Tariqul Islam, Advocate
For Respondents/Defendant: Kazi Mynul Hassan, Deputy Attorney-General—For the Respondent No. 5.

Subject: Labour Law

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 - Section 217, 218, 219, 219(gha), 303(e), 307, 351
Limitation Act, 1908 - Section 5
শ্রম বিধিমালা, ২০১৫ - Rule 205(4)
শ্রম বিধিমালা, ২০১৫ - Form 66

Prior History:
From the judgment and order dated 3-9-2020 passed by the learned Chairman of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka in BLA Appeal No. 66 of 2020

 
Disposition:
Rule made absolute

JUDGMENT
Md Ashfaqul Islam, J:

1. This Rule under adjudication, at the instance of the petitioners, issued on 20-9-2020, was in the following terms:

"Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the impugned judgment and order dated 3-9-2020 passed by the learned Chairman of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka Respondent No. 2, in BLA Appeal No. 66 of 2020, summarily dismissing the appeal and thereby affirming the judgment and order dated 21-8-2016 passed by the learned Chairman of 3rd Labour Court, Dhaka Respondent No. 3, in BLA (Criminal) Case No. 348 of 2015 convicting the convict-petitioners along with another under section 303(e)/307 of the Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 and sentencing all of them to suffer simple imprisonment for 6 (six) months and to pay a fine of Taka 30,000 (Thirty thousands) each of them in default, to suffer further simple imprisonment for 1 (one) month should not be declared as illegal, without lawful authority and is of no legal effect and/or such other or further order or orders passed as to this Court may seem fit and proper."
2. Be it mentioned that on an application for bail filed by the petitioners this Division on 2-12-2020 enlarged the convict-petitioners on bail.

3. The background leading to the Rule in short is that at the initiation of one Happy Akter, Labour Inspector (General), Department of Inspection for Factories and Establishment, Narayanganj (complainant) BLA (Criminal) Case No. 348 of 2015 was filed before the Chairman of 3rd Labour Court, Dhaka against the convict-petitioners under section 303(e)/307 of the Bangladesh Labour Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as Act, 2006). After receiving the said complaint the case was registered and charge was framed under section 303(e)/307 of the Act, 2006 against the petitioners and the trial proceeded accordingly. And upon completion of the trial the Chairman, Labour Court found the petitioners guilty under the said section and sentenced him to suffer simple imprisonment for 6 (six) months and to pay fine of Taka 30,000 (Thirty thousand), in default, to suffer further simple imprisonment for 1 (one) month by the Judgment and order dated 21-8-2016. The petitioners challenging the said judgment and order filed an appeal being BLA. Appeal No. 66 of 2020 with an application for condonation of delay of filing the appeal. The said appeal was heard on 3-9-2020 and the learned Chairman of the Labour Appellate Tribunal, Dhaka, respondent No. 2 summarily dismissed the appeal as being barred by law. The petitioners being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said order of dismissal moved this Division and obtained the present Rule as aforesaid.

4. Mr Md Oziullah, the learned Advocate appearing with Mr Tariqul Islam, the learned Advocate for the petitioners after placing the petition, judgment of both the Courts below mainly advanced his argument on the question of limitation which is the focal point and the decisive factor in respect of the impugned judgment passed by the Labour Appellate Tribunal. He submits that the Appellate Tribunal misdirected itself in holding that section 5 of limitation Act, 1908 has no manner of application under section 217 which relates to filing an appeal in as much as the same being a special law. In elaborating his submissions the learned Counsel refers section 218 and 219 of Act, 2006 read with Rule 205(4) of শ্রম বিধিমালা, ২০১৫ (hereinafter referred to as Rules, 2015) and also form 66 therein. It is his submissions that if the said law and Rule be read together, it can be well perceived that in filing appeal under section 217, if there be any delay, an application under section 5 of the limitation Act, 1908 is well applicable. In other words, as he reiterates, section 5 of the limitation Act will apply with all its trappings in case of filing an application before the Labour Appellate Tribunal. Therefore, he concludes that the Appellate Court should have taken into consideration the application for condonation of delay on merit while deciding the same.

5. The Rule is not opposed by filing any affidavit-in-opposition on behalf of the respondents.

6. We have heard the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners and considered his submissions and also gone through the impugned judgment passed by the Labour Appellate Tribunal and also the judgment passed by the 3rd Labour Court, Dhaka carefully.

7. The only question that to be considered in this petition is whether upon analysis and interpretation of the provisions of Labour Act, 2006 and the Bangladesh Srama Bidhimala, 2015, the order impugned against would sustain.

8. For better understanding and appreciation let us have a glean on a relevant laws governing the issue. Section 217 of Act, 2006 enjoins:

“২১৭ । এই আইন সাপেক্ষে, শ্রম আদালত কর্তৃক প্রদত্ত কোন রায়, সিদ্ধান্ত, রোয়েদাদ বা দন্ডের বিরুদ্ধে কোন সংক্ষুব্ধ পক্ষ, উহা প্রদানের ষাট দিনের মধ্যে ট্রাইব্যুনালে আপীল দায়ের করিতে পারিবে এবং উক্তরূপ আপীলের ক্ষেত্রে ট্রাইব্যুনালের সিদ্ধান্ত চুড়ান্ত হইবে।”
Next section 219 states:

“২১৯ । কোন শ্রম আদালত কোন দরখাস্ত অথবা ট্রাইব্যুনালে কোন আপীল বিধি দ্বারা নির্ধারিত ফরমে পেশ করিতে হইবে এবং উহাতে বিধি দ্বারা নির্ধারিত বিষয় ছাড়াও নিম্নলিখিত বিষয়সমূহ লিপিবদ্ধ থাকিতে হইবে, যথাঃ-

(ক)-----------------------------------

(ঘ) দরখাস্ত বা আপীল বিলম্বে পেশের ক্ষেত্রে উক্ত বিলম্বের কারণ এবং যে আইনের ধারার অধীন বিলম্ব মওকুফ প্রার্থনা করা হইয়াছে উহার উল্লেখ;”
Rule 205(4) of Rules, 2015 runs thus:

“২০৫ । শ্রম আদালত বা আপীল ট্রাইব্যুনালে মামলা দায়ের।–

(৪) ফরম-৬৬ অনুযায়ী ধারা ২১৯ মোতাবেক আপীল দায়ের করিতে হইবে।”
9. And in form 66 column no. 2 it has been clearly mentioned ‘আপীল দায়েরে বিলম্ব ও মওকুফের কারণসমূহ’ It would be worthwhile to reproduced the form itself for construing and understanding:

ফরম-৬৬
[ধারা ২১৯ এবং বিধি ২০৫(৪) দ্রষ্টব্য]

আপীলের দরখাস্ত
আপীল------------নং/২০
--------এ্যাপিল্যান্ট

প্রসঙ্গ:
------শ্রম আদালত কর্তৃক প্রদত্ত----- নং মোকদ্দমায়-------তারিখে প্রদত্ত রায়/অনুমতির বিরুদ্ধে বাংলাদেশ শ্রম আইন, ২০০৬ এর ধারা ২১৯ অনুযায়ী আপীল।
১। আপীলকারীর বিনীত নিবেদন
(ক) ----------------------------------------
(খ) ----------------------------------------
(গ) ----------------------------------------
(ঘ) ----------------------------------------
২। বিজ্ঞ শ্রম আদালত -----------তারিখের রায়ে নিম্নবর্ণিত কারণসমূহে ক্রমান্বয়ে সিদ্ধান্তে উপনীত হইয়াছেন—
কারণসমূহ:
(ক) ---------------------------------------
(খ) --------------------------------------
(গ) --------------------------------------
(ঘ) --------------------------------------
আপীল দায়েরে বিলম্ব মওকুফের কারণসমূহ
--------------------------------------
এমতাবস্থায় প্রার্থনা--------- শ্রম আদালতের ---------- তারিখের তর্কিত আদেশ বাতিলপূর্বক মোকদ্দমায় প্রার্থিত প্রতিকার মঞ্জুর করিতে মর্জি হয়।
স্বাক্ষর:--------------------------
তারিখ: -------------------------
সংযুক্তি
১।
10. However, the law and the Rules if be read together it gives a clear picture that an appeal filed before the Labour Appellate Tribunal under section 217 has to be read with 219(gha) which clearly prescribed that appeal if be filed out of time the reasons for delay must be stated with a prayer for condonation of the delay of the said Ruling. Together with that when we visit Rule 205(4) of Rules, 2015 we find that in terms of the procedure of form 66 an appeal should be filed. In this connection section 219 of the Act, 2006 shall have to be mentioned. And in form 66 column 2 it has been clearly mentioned আপীল দায়ের ও বিলম্বের কারণসমূহ.

11. The law and the rules clearly spelt out that limitation act would certainly operate as an aid to a party seeking condonation of delay in filing the appeal. This legal fiction or so to say the analogy has certainly escaped notice of the Appellate Tribunal. Further it has also failed to take into consideration the provisions of Rules, 2015 in the manner as we have discussed. Be it mentioned in this regard that right to appeal is a statutory right, a right which certainly should not be circumvent with any other provisions having prohibiting effect. Rules, 2015 came into force in chapter 15(9) of 2015 by SRO No. 291/Ain/2015. This Rule was framed and promulgated pursuant to section 351 of Act, 2006 which is the enabling section.

12. Therefore, we are of the view that the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioners merit substance and hold that with the introduction of Rules, 2015 the question of section 5 of the limitation Act shall have clear application in filing of appeal before the Labour Appellate Tribunal. This aspect was not considered while passing the impugned judgment summarily rejecting the appeal on the ground of limitation. Therefore, this Rule succeeds.

13. In the result the rule is made absolute. The judgment and order passed by the Labour Appellate Tribunal in BLA Appeal No. 66 of 2020 summarily dismissing the appeal on the ground of limitation is declared to have been passed without lawful authority having no legal effect and set-aside.

Communicate at once.

End.


  "Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===

===75 DLR (HCD) 4===
High Court Division 
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)
Present:
Mr. Justice Sheikh Hassan Arif
Mr. Justice Ahmed Sohel

Civil Revision No. 1091 of 2020

Dr. Muntassir Uddin Khan Mamoon alias Muntassir Mamoon
-------------Petitioner
Vs
Begum Munnujan Sufian (MP) and others
------------------Opposite-Parties

Judgement Date : November 01, 2021

Counsels:
AK Rashedul Huq, Advocate (Appearing Virtually and Physically)
—For the Petitioner

Md Nurul Amin, Advocate with Md Emamul Hague Advocate (Appearing Virtually)
—For the Opposite-Party No.1.

Judgment
Sheikh Hassan Arif, J:

1. At the instance of the defendant No. 2 in Title Suit No. 40 of 2019, Rule was issued calling upon the plaintiff-opposite party No. 01 to show cause as to why the order dated 23-1-2020 passed by the Joint District Judge, Third Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No. 40 of 2019 rejecting petitioner's application filed under Order VII, rule 11 read with section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for rejection of plaint, should not be set-aside.

2. Background Facts:

2.1 Facts, relevant for the disposal of the Rule, in short, are that the opposite party No. 1, as plaintiff, filed the said Title Suit No. 40 of 2019 against the petitioner and three others seeking declaration and compensation. The case of the opposite party No.1-plaintiff, in short, is that she is a member of Parliament and State Minister for Labour and Employment Ministry of the Government of Bangladesh. That a book named "Bangladesh Charcha/3" was edited by defendant No. 2, and published and printed etc. by defendant Nos. 1, 3 and 4. That the plaintiff received a copy of the said book on 25-6-2018 and found that the name of plaintiff's father was listed therein at Serial No. 36 as a member of 'Peace Committee' during Liberation War. The plaintiff then visited the residence of defendant No. 2 and made query about it, who could not give proper reply. The plaintiff, thereafter, issued notice on defendant No. 2 on 1-7-2018 and the said notice was replied by defendant No. 2 in a very casual way. That the plaintiff is a highly reputed person and that although her father was a freedom fighter and Awami League leader at the relevant time, the defendants have illegally shown his father as member of 'Peace Committee' in the said book which has caused serious damage to her reputation. Accordingly, the plaintiff sought a declaration to the effect that the said information at serial 36 in the list of Peace Committee members in the said book was illegal and untrue. Additionally, the plaintiff prayed for a decree of compensation for an amount of Taka 50 crore as against the damage allegedly caused to her reputation by such publication.

2.2 Upon service of summons in the said suit, the petitioner entered appearance as defendant No. 2 and filed an application under Order VII, rule 11 read with section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure for rejection of the plaint mainly on the ground that the suit for compensation being a suit for damage for libel, the period of limitation is one year under Article 24 of the Limitation Act and, as such, the suit having been filed after 14 years of the publication of the said book, the same is barred by limitation. It is further contended by the defendant No. 2 that the individual who filed the said suit has claimed himself as authorized person of the plaintiff and, as such, the plaint filed by such authorized person cannot be allowed to continue and that the plaintiff being in the service of profit of the government, the suit filed without prior permission of the government cannot be allowed to continue. Thereupon, the Court below, after hearing the parties, rejected the said application filed by defendant No. 2 vide impugned order dated 23-1-2020. Being aggrieved by such rejection, the defendant No. 2 has preferred this civil revisional application and obtained the aforesaid Rule.

2.3 The Rule is opposed by the plaintiff-opposite party No. 1 through learned advocate Mr Md Nurul Amin.

3. Submissions:

3.1 Mr AK Rashedul Huq, learned advocate appearing for the petitioner, after placing the plaint in question and the impugned order, submits that in the schedule to the plaint, the plaintiff has categorically stated that the book in question was published in February, 2005. Therefore, according to him, on the very information given by the plaint as regards the month of publication of the said book, the suit was obviously barred by limitation. In this regard, he has referred to Article 24 of the Limitation Act 1908 which prescribes for a period of one year for filing a suit for libel from the final publication of such libel.

3.2 Mr Huq then submits that it is clearly averred in the plaint that the same has been filed on behalf of the plaintiff by an authorized person named Md Jahangir Alam. According to him, since no averment has been made in the plaint as regards the nature of such authority of the said individual or as to how the said individual has been appointed as constituted attorney, the plaint cannot continue like this and, as such, according to him, the Court below has committed gross illegality in not rejecting the plaint on such application filed by the petitioner. By referring to some decisions of this Court including our Appellate Division, namely the decision in Faiez Ahmed and others vs Nur Allan Begum, 11 BLT 379, Nirmal Chandra Dutta vs Ansar Ahmed and others, 10 MLR (HC) 344 and the decision of our Appellate Division in BIWTC vs M/s Seres Shipping, 1984 BLD (AD) 222 = 36 DLR (AD) 82, he submits that our courts, in a clear-cut case, has held that a plaint may be rejected on the point of limitation even though in some cases it has been held that the point of limitation is a mixed question of facts and law. According to him, since this case falls under a clear-cut case category in that the plaint has specifically mentioned the month of publication of the said book and, admittedly, the plaint has been filed after about 14 years of such publication, the prayer in the plaint claiming compensation for such publication is clearly barred by limitation and, as such, the same should have at least been stricken out by the Court below.

3.3 As against above submissions, Mr Md Nurul Amin, learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiff opposite party No. 1, submits that it has time and again been decided by our superior Courts that the point of limitation is a mixed question of facts and law and such point can only be decided after examining evidences during trial. In support of his such submission, he has referred to various decisions of this Court and our neighboring Court, namely the decisions in Dulal Sarker vs Mrs. Nurjahan Begum, 35 DLR 217, Shahabuddin vs Habibur Rahman, 50 DLR (AD) 99 and Md Shahabuddin and others vs Habibur Rahman and others, 16 DLR (AD) 279. As regards the mentioning of time of publication of the said book in the schedule to the plaint, Mr Amin submits that the schedule is not the averment of the plaint. Therefore, according to him, a plaint cannot be rejected on the basis of information given in the schedule to it. In this regard, he has referred to the provisions under Order VII, rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Learned Advocate further submits that a plaint cannot be rejected in part and that even if it is found that some parts are barred by law, the plaint should be allowed to continue.

4. Deliberations, Findings and Orders of the Court:

4.1 Admittedly, the suit has been filed by the plaintiff through an authorized person. However, since there is no statement in the averment of the plaint as to how that authorized person has been authorized and since this issue has not been addressed by the Court below in the impugned order, we are not in a position to determine as to the nature of such authorization. On the other hand, even if the authorized person is not authorized properly, there is still time in favour of the plaintiff to get any such irregularity cured. Therefore, we are of the view that on this point, the plaint cannot be rejected.

4.2 Further admitted position is that the suit has been filed by the plaintiff seeking two reliefs, namely—

(1) Prayer 'Ka': declaration to the effect that the information given at serial 36 of the list of peace committee members in the said book, namely "Bangladesh Charcha/3" is illegally, untrue etc. and

(2) Prayer ‘Kha’: A decree of compensation for an amount of Taka 50 crore as against the damage done to the plaintiffs by such publication.

4.3 Therefore, it is clear that the plaintiff has made the said prayer ‘Kha' seeking a relief for the libel done by the said publication.

4.4 It further appears from the schedule to the plaint that the plaintiff has described the said book as well as the period of publication of the said book in the following terms: "প্রথম প্রকাশ ফেব্রুয়ারী/২০০৫". Therefore, it is clearly evident from this schedule to the plaint that it was very much within the knowledge of the plaintiff that the said book was published in 2005, although the plaintiff has made averment in the plaint that the copy of the said book came to her hand in 2018. The law of libel, in particular the period of limitation applicable to a suit of libel is very clear by Article 24 of the first schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908 and the said period of limitation is one year. It does not say that the said one year period will start from the date of knowledge. Rather, it says that the said period will start from the publication of the said libel. Therefore, according to the information given by the plaintiff in the schedule to the plaint itself, the said libel was in fact published in February, 2005. Therefore, the period of limitation to file a suit seeking compensation for such libel expired in February, 2006. However, the suit was admittedly filed on 13 February, 2019. Therefore, the said relief sought by the plaintiff in the plaint is apparently barred by limitation.

4.5 Now, the question is whether such point of limitation can be decided at the earliest opportunity on an application filed under Order VII, rule 11 of the Code for rejection of plaint. In this regard, we have examined the decisions referred to by learned advocates of the parties. It appears that depending on the averments made in the plaint, some decisions of our Court are in favour of not rejecting such plaint at the earliest opportunity. As for examples in Dulal Sarker’s case and Shahabuddin's case referred to above, it was decided that the question of limitation being a mixed question of law and fact, plaint cannot be rejected at the earliest opportunity under Order VII, rule 11. However, in some other cases, namely in Faiez Ahmed case, 11 BLT 379, Nirmal Chandra's case 10 MLR (HC) 344 and BIWTC case 1984 BLD (AD) 222 referred to above, it appears that some division benches of the High Court Davison and our Appellate Division have allowed rejection of plaint at the earliest opportunity when the suit is apparently found to be barred by limitation. In those cases, it has been held that when it is clear from the very averment of the plaint that the suit is barred by limitation, there is no necessity for taking further evidences to reach such conclusion.

4.6 The case in hand is a case where the point of limitation can be decided on the very averment of the plaint, in particular its schedule. According to the plaint and its schedule, the book was published in 2005 and the copy of the book came to plaintiff's hand in 2018. But she filed the said suit in 2019. Therefore, the prayer `Kha' in her plaint, which is in fact a prayer for compensation as against libel caused to her by such publication, is apparently barred by limitation, namely by Article 24 of the first schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908. Therefore, since this prayer `Kha' is clearly barred by limitation, we are of the view that this prayer cannot exist in the said plaint. We are further of the view that taking further evidence on the said point of limitation would in fact cause monetary and other loss to the parties, particularly when the plaintiff herself has mentioned the time of publication of the said libel in the plaint. In view of above, we find partial merit in the Rule and, as such, the same should be made absolute-in-part.

4.7 In the result, the Rule is made absolute-in-part. The impugned order dated 23-1-2020 passed by the Joint District Judge, Third Court, Dhaka in Title Suit No. 40 of 2019 is hereby set-aside to the extent it has rejected the prayer of the defendant No. 2 in respect of prayer `Kha' in the plaint. Accordingly, the prayer `Kha' in the plaint is hereby rejected and struck out. Office of the Court below is directed to delete the said prayer (prayer 'Kha') from the plaint. The Court below is also directed to dispose of the suit expeditiously, preferable within a period of 06 (six) months from receipt of the copy of this order.

Communicate this.

End.
===End===

===75 DLR (HCD) 8===
High Court Division 
(Special Original Jurisdiciton)
Present:
Mr. Justice J.B.M. Hassan
Mr. Justice Md. Khairul Alam

Writ Petitions No. 1511 of 2013.

M.A. Wadud and 6 (six) others
---------------- Petitioners
VS
Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works and others
------------------ Respondents

Judgement Date : July 29, 2019

Counsels:
Moyeen Firoze, Advocate
—For the Petitioners.

Zead-al-Malum, Advocate
—For the Respondent No.4.

Imam Hasan, Advocate
--For the Respondent No.2.

Dr. Md Shahjahan, Advocate
—For the Respondent No.5.

Judgment
JBM Hassan, J:

1. This Rule Nisi was issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the office memo bearing No. RAJUK/ NaMa:Tha-2A.BC-(Part) 1828/99/861 dated 10-12-2012 issued by the respondents No. 2/3 canceling approved building layout plan relating to plot No. 19, Road-7/C, Sector-3, Uttara Model Town should not be declared to be without any lawful authority and of no legal effect and as to why the respondent No.2 (RAJUK) should not be directed to approve the building layout plan by accommodating deviations (if any) in the completely constructed 6 (six)-storied building of the petitioners as per Building Constriction Rules, 2006 and/or pass such other or further order or orders as to this Court may seem fit and proper.

2. Relevant facts leading to issuance of the Rule Nisi are that the petitioners are the bonafide purchasers of seven flats out of total 10 flats in a six-storied building at plot No.19, Road No. 7/C, Sector-3, Uttara Model Town, Dhaka (the schedule land). One M.G. Akbar was an allottee of the aforesaid plot under the RAJUK for 99 years lease which was later gifted to his wife, Mrs. Jahanara Akbar (respondent No. 4). Mrs. Jahanara Akbar as land owner entered into an agreement on 11-1-2000 with respondent No.5 (the developer company) for the purpose of constructing a six-storied building comprising 10 flats on the aforementioned plot. Out of said flats, the developer company would get seven flats and the land owner's ratio was three flats. Pursuant to the said agreement the land owner also executed power of attorney on 6-5-2002 in favour of the developer empowering to develop land by constructing building and also to sell the flats from the said building as per developer's ratio under agreement between the parties. Accordingly, the developer after obtaining RAJUK approved plan through land owner, constructed a six-storied building on the aforementioned plot and obtaining necessary utility permissions/connections, completed the project. The petitioners purchased their respective flats on different dates from the developer by way of respective allotment letters and upon receiving the payment from all the petitioners, the developer handed over possession of respective flats on different dates to all the petitioners.

3. During their peaceful possession, the petitioners received a letter from one Shiban Akbar, claiming to be the daughter of the land owner. In the said letter she informed that her mother (land owner) cancelled the previous power of attorney executed in favour of the developer and appointed her as new attorney for the schedule property and, as such, the sale and registration of flats were responsibility of newly appointed attorney. She also mentioned that developer breached several terms and conditions of the development agreement and denied respondent No.4 of her entitled share. Mrs. Shiban Akbar also mentioned that in contravention of the agreement dated 11-1-2000 the developer, handed over possession of flats to 3rd party purchasers without handing over land owner's flat and, as such, the land owner would not recognize or accept any sale proceeding of flats until her entitled flats are handed over by the developer and compensation is paid in full.

4. The land owner also filed a criminal case (Uttara PS Case No. 42 dated 20-3-2005 corresponding to GR No. 123/05) against the petitioners No. 1-6 for purchasing the flats in violation of the Development Agreement. Learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate discharged the petitioners No. 2-6 from the case as the Court did not find any substance in the allegation. The petitioner No.1 filed a miscellaneous petition under section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) where the proceedings against him was stayed by the High Court Division. As part of their grudge against the petitioners, the respondent No.4 and her daughter used their connections both in various authorities as well as in political arena. Being influenced by respondent No.4 and her daughter, the RAJUK served notice alleging deviations in the constructed building in question from the approved layout plan.

5. Since neither the respondent No.4 (land owner) nor the respondent No.5 (the developer) took any initiative for registration of the flats, on 28-11-2012 the petitioners applied to the RAJUK (Lessor) for registration of sale deed in favour of the petitioners. But having no response, the petitioners filed a suit bearing Title Suit No. 971 of 2012 against the developer and land owner praying for registration of the purchased flats and the suit is now pending before the 2nd Assistant Judge, Dhaka. In the meantime, the petitioners came to know that the RAJUK with the consent of the land owner (respondent No.4) cancelled the building layout plan on 10-12-2012. In the letter of cancellation dated 10-12-2012 the RAJUK stated that since respondent No.4 as leasehold owner, wrote a letter informing the RAJUK that she does not have resources to remove deviation and gave her accord to cancel the layout plan, the RAJUK decided to cancel the said plan.

6. Despite the RAJUK had knowledge that the petitioners are the genuine purchasers of their respective flats of the building and they are living in the building since, 2003, yet no notice whatsoever was given to the petitioners. On the contrary, notice of cancellation was issued only to the respondent No.4 (the land owner) who consented for such cancellation. The RAJUK gave her an opportunity to appeal within 30 days which is apparently a mockery as the RAJUK has cancelled the building layout plan due to her instigation and persuasion.

7. In this backdrop, the petitioners filed this writ petition and obtained the present Rule.

8. The RAJUK as respondent No.2 has filed an affidavit-in-opposition controverting the statements made in the writ petition. Contentions of this respondent, inter alia, are that on an application of the lessee (landowner)/developer, the RAJUK sanctioned plan for constructing a six-storied building vide its memo No. তিস-১৮২৮/১৯৯৯ dated 17-8-1999, but the developer constructed the building in question with deviation of the approved plan. Thereafter, the RAJUK on 7-4-2005 issued show cause notice asking the land owner/developer as to why deviated parts of the building should not be removed. Since the reply of show cause notice was not satisfactory, the RAJUK issued final notice on 19-4-2005 asking the land owner/developer to remove deviated part of the building. Ultimately, the RAJUK executed several operations to remove the deviated parts of the building on 23-9-2010, 26-9-2010, 19-12-2011, 20-12- 2011, 21-11-2012 and 22-11-2012 respectively to remove the deviated parts of the building. While driving operations to remove the deviated parts of the building, the occupiers/developer requested the eviction team not to proceed with the eviction operation and they promised to remove deviated part of the building at their own risk, but the occupiers/developer did not keep their commitment. As a result the RAJUK authority as per section 9 of the Building Construction Act having authority cancelled approved plan on 10-12-2012 which was granted under section 3 of the Act. Section 9 of the Building Construction Act, 1952 (the Act, 1952) provides that, the sanction granted under section 3 or section 3C shall be liable to cancellation by the Authorized Officer or the Committee, as the case may be, for breach of any of the terms or conditions or making statement not correct under which such sanction was granted. The order passed under section 9 of the Building Construction Act, 1952 is appealable under section 15 of the said Act.

9. The land owner as respondent No. 4 has also filed an affidavit-in-opposition controverting the statements of the writ petition. Contentions of this answering respondent, in brief, are that the present petitioners instituted Title Suit No. 971 of 2012 before the learned Assistant Judge, 2nd Court, Dhaka praying to get registered deed of purchase relating to respective flats and it is still pending. The petitioners also applied to the Chairman, RAJUK, by letter dated 28-11-2012 (Annexure-G) for acquiring ownership in the flats of the building in question. In view of pendency of civil suit, the writ petition is not maintainable.

10. The land development agreement dated 11-1-2000 between the respondent No.5, Arafa Corporation Limited (developer) and the respondent No.4 (land owner), was not registered and also expired on 10-7-2002 and that the respondent No.5 (developer) did not take any effective step in due time for its extension or to execute any new agreement with the land owner (respondent No.4). On 6-5-2002 the developer (respondent No.5) collected signature of the land owner in a general power of attorney and that it was not registered and authenticated by any lawful authority and that it was cancelled on 15-9-2005. Pursuant to development agreement dated 11-1-2000 and the power of attorney dated 6-5-2002 (revoked on 15-9-2005), the land owner (respondent No.4) never handed over any possession or issued any allotment letter like Annexures-C and Cl series in favour of the petitioners and so those have no legal binding upon the land owner. Shiban Akbar (daughter of land owner) was appointed as attorney of land owner by registered power of attorney dated 7-7-2004. The said attorney issued letter dated 18-1-2005 to the petitioners' developer company (Arafa Corporation Ltd.) and other concern government officers stating the facts about unpaid compensation of the developer company, expiry of agreement and revocation of power of attorney between the land owner and the developer and present status of the building or flats in question.

11. The building layout plan dated 17-8-1999 and the cancellation thereof vide letter dated 10-12-2012 (impugned) (Annexures-H/1 and H2 respectively) show that those were issued in favour of the respondent No.4 (land owner) and that in the approval letter dated 17-8-1999 present petitioners were not the party and beneficiary. The RAJUK as a statutory authority following due process of law under the lawful obligation, legally cancelled the building layout plan by issuing show cause notice and that the letter of cancellation dated 10-12-2012 was issued on the ground that the building in question was constructed in violation and in contravention of the layout plan. Further, allegation of violation of natural justice is totally misconception of law. The petitioners are all trespassers and illegal occupiers in the demised building and so claiming notice relating to action of the RAJUK are totally mockery and false. The RAJUK did not commit any illegality and that mere construction of a building on a portion of land by any unauthorized occupant or trespasser or any developer company without any lawful authority does not create any title over the land in favour of them.

12. The petitioners have already instituted a suit for declaration and injunction against the respondents No.4 and 5 being Civil Suit No. 830 of 2009 (now renumbered as 971 of 2012). The respondents are contesting the suit by submitting written statements. The petitioners' right to entitlement of flats are under adjudication in the above mentioned civil suit. This answering respondent No.4 as land owner does not have any contractual obligation with the petitioners.

13. By filing supplementary affidavit, the land owner (respondent No.4) further states that earlier the respondent No. 5 (developer) filed writ petition No. 2730 of 2005 challenging two orders of the RAJUK dated 5-9-2004 and 19-4-2005 requiring to demolish constructed building and ultimately the respondent No. 5 did not proceed with the Rule due to which it was discharged for non-prosecution by order dated 10-8-2009.

14. Mr Moyeen Firoze, the learned Advocate appearing for the petitioners submits that the petitioners have been possessing the schedule flats by way of purchase from the respondent No. 5 (developer) but due to dispute between the developer and the land owner, the petitioners could not obtain the registered purchase deed and so they filed a suit before the competent civil court. He further submits that while the petitioners are in possession in the aforesaid flats, the RAJUK issued notice alleging some deviations in constructing the building and ultimately, in the year 2004 and 2005, the RAJUK demolished the deviated portions of the building and realized expenditures from the developer incurred for the demolition works. Therefore, the subsequent impugned order of the RAJUK, again alleging deviation is malafide. He further submits that due to dispute between the land owner and the developer, the land owner instructed the RAJUK to cancel the layout plan in order to dismantle the building for evicting the petitioners and the developer and therefore, the impugned order is collusive and malafide.

15. Mr Firoze also submits that the impugned order was issued under section 9 of the Building Construction Act, 1952 (the Act, 1952) and in order to issue such order the RAJUK is required to conduct an enquiry under section 3B of the said Act serving notices upon the owner, the occupier and the person in charge of the building. Although the petitioners are the admitted occupiers and the developer is admittedly in charge of the building (by constructing the building) but no such notices were ever served upon the petitioners or the developer. Therefore, the impugned order of cancellation of plan was issued in violation of mandatory provisions of the Act, 1952 and so, it warrants interference of this Court. He again submits that there is no circumstances available regarding the building as mentioned in section 3B(5) of the Act, 1952 and so the impugned order needs to be interfered by this Court under its judicial review.

16. Mr Imam Hasan, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No.2 (RAJUK) contends that on observance of all the required procedures under the Act, 1952, the impugned order was issued and so, it should not be interfered. He further contends that section 15 of the Act, 1952 incorporates provisions for preferring appeal against an order passed under section 9 of the Act, 1952 but by passing the said alternative forum, the petitioners have filed this misconceived writ petition.

17. Mr Zead-al-Malum, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 4 (land owner) after placing his affidavit-in-opposition and supplementary affidavit in-opposition contends as follows:

(A) The petitioners do not have any locus-standi to file this writ petition because;

the agreement entered into between the land owner and the developer has already been expired long before their alleged purchase;
before petitioners' alleged purchase the period of the letter of sanction for constructing building in question has already been expired in the year 2002;
by the unregistered contract document the petitioners cannot claim title over the flats in question and the civil suit regarding petitioners claim of title is yet to be decided. Moreover, the power of attorney executed in favour of the developer has already been cancelled due to which he also filed civil suit.
(B) The petitioners or the developer did not receive any occupancy certificate from the RAJUK and so they are not the occupants in the register of the RAJUK. Therefore, question of serving notice upon them as occupants does not arise.

(C) Ms Shiban Akbar is the constituent attorney appointed by the land owner to whom the petitioners added in the suit. But they have not impleaded her in the writ petition and so, the writ petition is not maintainable due to non-joinder of relevant party.

(D) The writ petition involves disputed question of facts which cannot be adjudicated under this summary procedure.

(E) The respondent No.5 (developer) earlier filed writ petition challenging the notice of the RAJUK requiring to demolish the building and ultimately the Rule issued therein was discharged for non prosecution and therefore, on the same cause of action, the present writ petition is not maintainable.

(F) The petitioners do not press 2nd part of the Rule although it is the substantive part of the Rule. Therefore, due to nonexistent of substantive part of the Rule, the 1st part of the Rule is also liable to be discharged.

18. Both the parties, in support of their contentions, have referred to several precedents and laws, in particular, the petitioners' learned Advocate refers to the following cases:

The case of Abdus Sattar (Md) vs Bangladesh and others reported in 1 BLC (AD) 161, Jobon Nahar and others vs Bangladesh, through the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works. Department, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh and others reported in 49 DLR 108, Secretary Ministry of Works, Government of Bangladesh vs Hasner Jahan Ahad reported in 6 BLC (AD) 111, Mohammad Amir Hossain vs Authorised Officer; RAJUK and another reported in 9 BLT (HCD) 326, Dr. Nurul Islam vs Bangladesh reported in 33 DLR (AD) 201.

19. The respondent No.2 has also referred to an unreported case i.e a judgment and order dated 4-4-2018 passed in Writ Petition No. 5779 of 2015.

20. The learned Advocate for the respondent No. 4 (landowner) refers to the following cases:

The case of Major (Retd) Quazi Hasna Hena Begum vs Lt. Col. Kazi Mansurul Islam and others reported in 62 DLR (AD) 260, Chief Engineer Roads and Highways Directorate, Dhaka vs Advocate Asaduzzaman Siddique and others reported in 69 DLR (AD) 440, Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. vs Bangladesh Environmental Lawyers' Association Ltd (BELA) and others reported in 65 DLR (AD) 180, Md Sahidul Huq vs Chairman, Appellate Authority, Rajuk, Rajuk Bhaban, Dhaka and others reported in VI ADC 872, Begum Khaleda Zia vs Government of Bangladesh and others reported in 63 DLR 385 And Musarat Islam vs Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh represented by the Secretary Ministry of Land and others reported in 70 DLR 569.

21. Dr. Md Shahjahan, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondent No.5 (developer) submits that he did not receive any notice relating to the impugned action and the order issued by the RAJUK and so the impugned cancellation of sanction was not done in accordance with the Act, 1952.

22. We have gone through the writ petition, affidavits in opposition separately filed by the respondents No. 2 and 4 and other materials on record including the cited cases.

23. To file the writ petition question of locus standi of the petitioners having been raised, we have to settle this issue first. In this regard, it appears that admittedly the landowner (respondent No.4) executed an agreement on 11-1-2000 with the developer (respondent No.5) for constructing a six-storied building (10 flats and ground floor parking) over the schedule land. Pursuant to said agreement, the landowner also executed a power of attorney empowering the developer to construct the building as well as to sell 7 (seven) flats thereof as it acquired pursuant to the agreement with the land owner. From the correspondences of the landowner and her daughter, it is also admitted position that in the meantime the building was constructed and Annexure-C series to the writ petition show that the petitioners entered into their respective agreements along with the allotment letters obtained from the respondent No.5 (developer). Indisputably the developer handed over possession of the flats of the schedule building to the respective petitioners on different dates in between 2003-2004 and since then they have been residing in the said building. From the correspondences as contained in Annexure-D1 to the writ petition, we find that the daughter of land owner as her new attorney addressed the petitioners as occupants in the building.

24. However, it appears that there are disputes between the land owner and the developer and thereby due to non executing of the sale deed in favour of the petitioners, they filed Title Suit No. 971 of 2012 before the competent civil court and Title Suit No. 952 of 2015 was also filed by the developer challenging revocation of power of attorney.

25. In the aforesaid situation, although Mr Zead Al Malum, the learned Advocate for the landowner (respondent No.4) submits that until any decision in the civil suit and there being no registered agreement, the petitioners cannot claim title over the flats in question and consequently they have no locus standi to file the writ petition.

26. In this regard, we have gone through the case of Comprehensive Holdings Limited and others vs MH Khan Monju and others reported in 69 DLR (AD) 420 wherein the apex Court held that although the agreement or allotment letter given by the developer company relating to real estate are not registered but the requirement of registration under the Transfer of Property Act and the Registration Act will not be applicable in this particular situation under special enactment i.e “রিয়েল এস্টেট উন্নয়ন ও ব্যবস্থাপনা আইন, ২০১০” (the Act, 2010). Relevant portions of the said ratio of our apex Court are as follows:

"It is also very significant to state that the developer issued the impugned letter dated 11-7-2010 to the plaintiff asking him to take back the booking money paid by him earlier after the Ain, 2010 came into effect, so the developer was legally obliged to follow the provisions of the Ain, 2010. And further, this law having been enacted after amendment was brought in the Transfer of Property Act, the Registration act and the Specific Relief Act vide sections 54A, 17A and 21A respectively in 2004 and no provision having been made therein making registration of the agreement for sale/purchase of a "real estate" compulsory, it could not be said that no right, title and interest accrued to the plaintiff over the two apartments and the two car parking spaces for non-existence of any registered deed of agreement for the purchase of the two apartments by the plaintiff as held by the trial Court."
27. In view of above ratio, it cannot be said that for want of registration, the documents executed between the developer and the petitioners relating to acquiring flats in question are invalid. However, since the petitioners have already filed the civil suit that would be decided on proper scrutiny and proof of their relevant documents. But at this stage, from all the correspondences and transactions, it cannot be said that the petitioners are not the occupants in this schedule property.

28. Although, Mr Zead-al-Malum submits that the petitioners or the developer have not obtained any occupancy certificate from the RAJUK but this requirement came into force after the Rules framed in the year, 2006 while the daughter of the land owner claiming attorney was addressing the petitioners as occupants in the year 2005. Moreover, from the notice of the RAJUK alleging deviations in the building issued in the year 2004, it is apparent that the building was definitely constructed before 2004 and the petitioners have been living there as occupants having admitted possession from the developer. Therefore, we are of the view that petitioners have locus standi to file this writ petition at least as occupants in the schedule building.

29. Now to determine propriety of the impugned order dated 10-12-2012 (Annexure-H to the writ petition) let us first read the same relevant portions of which are as follows:

“রাজধানী উন্নয়ন কর্তৃপক্ষ
অথরাইজড অফিসার-২এ এর কার্যালয়
মহাখালী জোনাল অফিস
মহাখালী, ঢাকা-১২১২
স্মারক নং ... তারিখ ...

প্রতি
মিসেস জাহানারা আকবর, প্লট নং ৪/এ
৪২/৩ নিউ ইস্কাটন রোড
শান্তিনগর লেন, রমনা
ঢাকা-১০০০

আপনার আবেদনের প্রেক্ষিতে নিম্নোক্ত জমিতে একটি ৬ (ছয়) তলা আবাসিক ইমারত এর নকশা অনুমোদন দেওয়া হয় (স্মারক নং- রাজউক/নঅঅ/ওস-১৮২৮/৯৯/১৮৭৬ তাঃ তারিখ- ১৭-৮-৯৯)
প্রস্তাবিত জমি/প্লট এর অবস্থান ও পরিমানঃ
(ক) সিটি কর্পোরেশন/পৌরসভা/থানা/মহল্লাঃ ঢাকা
(খ) সি,এস/আর,এস দাগনংঃ প্লট নং-১৯
(গ) মৌজা ও থানারনামঃ
(ঘ) ব্লক নংঃ
(ঙ) সিট নংঃ
(চ) ওয়ার্ড নংঃ
(ছ) সেক্টর নংঃ ৩ (প্ল্যান ১৩)
(জ) রাস্তারনামঃ ৭ সি
(ঝ) বাহুরমাপসহ জমি/প্লটের পরিমানঃ
(ঞ) জমি/প্লট ও বিদ্যমান বাড়ি/কাঠামোর বিবরণঃ ৬ (ছয়) তলা আবাসিক ইমারত

সাইট পরিদর্শন ও নথি পর্যালোচনা করে দেখা যায় যে, আলোচ্য প্লটে কলাম, সিঁড়ি, লিফট ডেভিয়েশন করে একটি ৬ (ছয়) তলা ভবন নির্মাণ করা হয়েছে। এ সকল ডেভিয়েশন অপসারণ করা হলে ভবনটি ঝুঁকিপূর্ণ হয়ে যাবে এবং জান-মালের ক্ষয় ক্ষতির সম্ভাবনা রয়েছে। ডেভিয়েশন অপসারণে আপনাকে পত্র দেয়া হলে আপনি তা অপসারণের আপনার রিসোর্স এর অভাব এর কথা জানিয়ে রাজউককে পত্র দেন এবং আইন অনুযায়ী নকশা বাতিলের বিষয়ে একমত পোষণ করেন। এমতাবস্থায় ৫-১২-২০১২ তারিখে রাজউক ভবনে অনুষ্ঠিত বিসি কমিটির সর্ব সম্মত সিদ্ধান্ত মোতাবেক ইমারত নির্মাণ আইন, ১৯৫২ এর ৯ ধারা এবং ঢাকা মহানগর ইমারত (নির্মাণ, উন্নয়ন, সংরক্ষণ ও অপসারণ) বিধিমালা, ২০০৮ এর বিধি ২৯(২)(খ) অনুযায়ী ভবনটির রাজউক/নঅঅ/৩সি-১৪৮২৮/৯৯/১৮৭৬ তাঃ তারিখ ১৭-৮-৯৯ স্মারকের নকশাটি বাতিল করা হলো।

এ সিদ্ধান্তের বিরুদ্ধে (Building Construction Act, 1952 (Act No. II of 1953) এর ১৫ ধারা অনুযায়ী বাতিলের তারিখ হতে ৩০ (ত্রিশ) দিনেরমধ্যে নির্ধারিত ফরমে আপিল করার সুযোগ রহিয়াছে।

অথরাইজড অফিসার-২এ
ও সদস্য সচিব, বিসি কমিটি ২এ
রাজউক, ঢাকা”
30. For better appreciation of the aforesaid impugned order, the provisions mentioned therein i.e section 9 of the Act, 1952 and the rule 29 (2) (kha) of “ঢাকা মহানগর ইমারত (নির্মাণ, উন্নয়ন, সংরক্ষণ ও অপসারণ) বিধিমালা, ২০০৮”(the Rules, 2008) are reproduced herein below:

“9.The sanction granted under (section 3 or section 3C) shall be liable to cancellation by the Authoriosed Officer or the Committee, as the case may be, for breach of any of the terms or conditions or making statements not correct under which such sanction was granted.”
“২৯। বিল্ডিং, স্থগিতকরণ অথবা অননুমোদিত কাঠামো ভাঙ্গিয়া দেওয়া, ইত্যাদি ----
(১) ---------------
(২) নির্মাণ অনুমতিপত্র স্থগিত বা বাতিল করা যাইবে, যদি-
(ক) সংশ্লিষ্ট জমি বা প্লটেরবিষয়ে কোন আইনগত জটিলতা দেখা দেয়;
(খ) অনুমোদনের শর্তাবলী ভঙ্গ করা হয়;
(গ) আবেদনপত্র বা অন্যান্য প্রযোজ্য ফরমসমূহে ভুল অথবা মিথ্যা তথ্য পরিবেশন করা হয়; এবং
(ঘ) ইমারত ব্যবহারে অসামঞ্জস্যতা দেখা দেয় এবং অনুমোদিত নকশার বিধি বহির্ভূত পরিবর্তন করা হয়।”
31. Since section 9 of the Act, 1952 provides provision for cancellation of sanction granted under section 3 of the said Act, for better understanding let us read the relevant portions of section 3 of the Act, 1952 which are as follows:

"3.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement, no person shall, without the previous sanction of an Authorised Officer, construct or re construct or make addition or alternation to any building, or excavate or re-excavate any tank within the area to which this Act applies; and such sanction shall be subject to such terms and condition as the Authorised Officer may think fit to impose:

Provided that such sanction shall remain valid for three years from the date of sanction and on the expiry of the period, the application shall have to apply and obtain a fresh sanction.
1 (a)----------
Explanation:--- For the purpose of obtaining fresh sanction under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1a), no fresh sanction shall have to be obtained for the construction of buildings where the construction has been made up to 4 feet above plinth level,."
32. According to provisio to section 3 (1), the validity of a sanction is for 3 (three) years and on the expiry of the period, a fresh sanction is requried. But explanation of the said provision provides that if within the 3 years, the construction has been made upto 4 feet above plinth level, no fresh sanction shall have to be obtained for construction of building. From the above, it is clear that the force of sanction under section 3 of the Act, 1952 remains for 3 (three) years or till construction upto 4 feet above plinth level of the proposed building, whichever is earlier. If construction is completed upto 4 feet above plinth level, it is no matter as to whether the sanction has the validity period of 3 years and in other words sanctions validity is immaterial and that being so, after this stage of construction of the building, cancellation of sanction under section 9 of the Act, 1952 does not bear any effective value. Therefore, we hold that action of cancellation of sanction under section 9 of the Act, 1952 can be taken when it is alive having validity period i.e upto 3 (three) years or till construction of 4 feet above plinth level.

33. Here, the impugned order shows that the sanction was given on 17-8-1999 and so, after 3 (three) years it expired on 16-8-2002. On the other hand, admittedly the developer handed over possession of flats of the completed building from 2003 and, as such, it is beyond dispute that the minimum construction work requirement (4 feet above plinth level) was completed within the validity period (3 years) of sanction. Moreover, the impugned order does not claim the above time frame violation.

34. Pursuant to section 3(1) and its explanation, after completion of construction of 4 feet above plinth level, validity of sanction does not require and so, for the same reason, question of its cancellation does not arise after completion of the building. It would be more clear if we look at the provision of cancellation of sanction i.e section 9 of the Act, 1952 which specially spells out "sanction granted under section 3". Therefore, after construction of building, if any deviation is found from the terms or conditions of sanction, the punitive action can be taken under section 3B of the Act. Regard being had to the above, the impugned order purported to have been issued under section 9 of the Act, 1952 is misconceived and with a malafide motive.

35. Besides, if we read the impugned order it appears that the RAJUK cancelled the plan of the schedule building alleging deviation in constructing the building, in other words, for breach of terms or conditions of sanction. In section 9 of the Act, 1952 the word cancellation of plan does not appear and that there is no such separate provision for cancelling the plan but as per submission of the RAJUK since sanction was given along with plan, cancellation of plan amounts to cancellation of sanction. However, even if we accept this submission and if section 9 of the Act, 1952 is applied for cancellation of plan as per provision of the said section the RAJUK has to come to a finding as to whether there was any breach of terms or conditions of sanction. Since the impugned order purports deviation, it can be turmed as the breach of terms or conditions under the sanction. Therefore, in order to make finding as to breach of any of the terms or conditions referring to deviatious, the authority has to follow the procedure provided in section 3B of the Act, 1952 which has not been denied by the learned Advocate for the RAJUK and that section 3B of the Act, 1952 also refers to action for breach of terms or conditions of sanction granted under section 3 of the said Act.

36. Thus, in any view of the matter, after construction of building only recourse lies to the RAJUK is the action under section 3B of the Act, 1952. However, the learned Advocate for the RAJUK vehemently submits that following the procedure under section 3B of the Act, 1952 the impugned order was issued.

37. Therefore, let us see as to whether the procedure incorporated in section 3B of the Act, 1952 was followed in issuing the impugned order. To appreciate this issue, let us examine the section 3B of the Act, 1952 relevant portions of which are as follows:

"3B.—(1) Where it appears to the Authorised Officer or the Committee, as the case may be, that—
(a) any building has been constructed or re-constructed, or any addition or alternation to any building has been made, or any tank has been excavated or re-excavated, before or after the commencement of the Building Construction (Amendment) Ordinance, 1986 (Ordinance No. LXXII of 1986);
(b) any building is being constructed, or re-constructed, or any addition or alteration to any building is being made or any tank is being excavated or re-excavated.
Without obtaining the sanction under section 3, or in breach of any of the terms or conditions subject to which sanction was granted under that sanction, he or it may. by a notice, direct the owner. the occupier and the person in-charge of the building or the tank to show cause, within such period, not being less than seven days, as may be mentioned in the notice, why—

(i)The building or any portion thereof, whether constructed or under construction, as may be specified in the notice, should not be removed or dismantled; or
(ii)The tank or any portion thereof, whether excavated or under excavation, specified in the notice, should not be filled up; or
(iii)Further construction or re-construction of, or addition or alteration to, the building, or excavation or re excavation of the tank, should not be stopped.
(2) -----------
(3) Where, after considering the cause shown, if any, within the time mentioned in the notice and giving the person showing the cause a reasonable opportunity of being heard, or where no cause is shown within such time, the Authorised Officer or the Committee, as the case may be, after such enquiry as he or it deems fit, is satisfied that the building has been, or is being. constructed or re-constructed, or addition or alteration to the building has been, or is being, made, or the tank has been, or is being, excavated or re excavated without obtaining the sanction under section 3, or in breach of any of the terms and conditions subject to which sanction was granted under that section, he or it may, by an order in writing stating reasons therefore, direct the owner, the occupier and the person in-charge of the building or the tank to remove or dismantle the building or any portion thereof or to fill up the tank or any portion thereof as specified in the order within such time as may be fixed by him or to stop further construction or re construction, addition or alteration or excavation or re-excavation, addition or alteration or excavation or excavation or re-excavation, as the case may be; and otherwise shall make an order vacating the notice.
(4) ----------
(5) No order under this section shall be made directing any person to remove or dismantle any building or part thereof or to fill up any tank or part thereof unless it is found that—
(a) such building or part thereof has been constructed, or re-constructed, or such tank or part thereof has been excavated or re-excavated at a place or in a manner which is contrary to the master plan or development plan, if any, of the area in which the building or the tank is situated, or
(b) such building or part thereof cannot be re-constructed, or altered or such tank, or part thereof cannot be re-excavated, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the sanction alleged to have been breached, or
(c) such building or part thereof or such tank or part thereof causes any undue inconvenience in respect of use or occupation of any land or building or road or passage in the area adjacent to it, or
(d) sanction, if prayed for, could not be granted for the construction or re-construction of, or addition or alteration to, the building or excavation or re-excavation of the tank."
38. On a plain reading of the aforesaid provisions, it appears that before coming to the final decision under section 3B(1) of the Act, 1952, the authority is required to serve notice upon 3 (three) persons i.e the owner, occupier and the person in charge of the building in question. Here in this case admittedly, the developer (respondent No.5) constructed the building in question on the basis of the agreement and power of attorney (Annexures-A and B) and so, the developer is a person in charge of the building but no notice was served upon him although the RAJUK in the earlier occasion realized costs from this developer after demolishing the deviated portions of the building. Moreover, from the correspondences .and annexures as contained in the writ petition as well as in the affidavit-in-opposition, we held above that the petitioners are the occupiers in the schedule building. Therefore, notice is required to be served upon these occupiers (petitioners) and the person in charge (the developer) in order to come to the fair and proper decision as to the defect/deviations of the building. But admittedly these concerned persons have not been notified as per requirement of section 3B(1) of the Act, 1952.

39. Secondly, even notice would have been served upon those persons, after considering cause shown (if any) by the aforementioned persons or if no reply is submitted, yet the RAJUK is required in accordance with section 3B(3) of the Act, 1952 to conduct an enquiry before coming to final decision but here the respondent RAJUK has not asserted as to conducting any such enquiry before taking the decision under the impugned order.

40. What is more, relating to the building in question, earlier a notice was issued on 7-4-2005 wherein the RAJUK alleged some deviations in the following manner:

“রাজধানী উন্নয়ন কর্তৃপক্ষ
রাজউক ভবন, ঢাকা
স্মারক নং রাজউক/নঅঅ২/৩িস১৮২৮/৯৯/৫৬মু
তারিখ ৭-৪-০৫

প্রেরকঃ অথরাইজড অফিসার-২
নকশা অনুমোদন শাখা
রাজউক, ঢাকা

প্রাপকঃ মিসেস জাহানারা আকবর
প্লট ১৯, রোড নং ০৭সি, সেক্টরনং ০৩, উত্তরা, আ/এ

বিষয়ঃ ই,বি,বি,সি এ্যাক্ট ১৯৫২ ও (পরবর্তী সংশোধন ১৯৮৪) লংঘন করিয়া প্লট নং ১৯, রোড নং ৭ সি, সেক্টর নং ০৩, মৌজা উত্তরা আ/এ এ অনুমোদিত প্ল্যানের বহির্ভূত নির্মাণ প্রসঙ্গে।

অত্র দপ্তরের রেকর্ড পত্র হইতে প্রতীয়মান হয় যে, আপনি/আপনারা ইমারত নির্মাণ (সংশোধন) আইন ১৯৮৭ এর ৩(তিন) ধারা মোতাবেক অত্র দপ্তরের স্মারক নং রাজউক/নঅঅ/৩সি১২২৮/৯৯/১৮৭৬ তাঃ তারিখ ১৭-৮-৯৯ দ্বারা একখানা আবাসিক/বানিজ্যিক/শিল্প/গুদামঘর এর পর জানা যায় যে, আপনি/আপনারা নিম্ন বর্নিত খালি জায়গা রাখিয়া উল্লেখিত প্লট/দাগে/হোল্ডিং এ ইমারত নির্মাণ করিয়াছেন/করিতেছেন।

উত্তর দিকে ১.৫০ মিটার স্থলে ১.১৪ মিটার, দক্ষিণ দিকে ১.২৫ মিটার স্থলে ১.২৫ মিটার, পূর্ব দিকে ২.০০ মিটার স্থলে ১.৮২ মিটার ও পশ্চিমে ১.৫০ স্থলে ১.৫০ মিটার।
ইহা ছাড়া উত্তর দিকে ০.৯১ মিটার, দক্ষিণে ০.৩২ মিটার পূর্ব দিকে ০.১৫৩ পশ্চিমে ০.৫৫ মিটার বারান্দা বাড়ানো আছে। অনুমোদিত নকশার ব্যত্যয় ঘটাইয়া সিঁড়ির অবস্থান পরিবর্তন করা হইয়াছে।

অতএব, ইহা পরিস্কার ভাবে বুঝা যায় যে, আপনি উপরে উল্লিখিত আইনের বরখেলাপ করতঃ অনুমোদিত নকশার বহির্ভূত নির্মাণ করিয়াছেন।

উপরে বর্ণিত পরিস্থিতিতে আপনাকে/ আপনাদিগকে এই চিঠি জারীর ৭ (সাত) দিনের মধ্যে ইমারত নির্মাণ (সংশোধন) আইন ১৯৮৭ এর ৯ (নয়) ধারা মোতাবেক অনুমোদিত নকশা কেন বাতিল করা হইবে না এবং অনুমোদিত নকশার বহির্ভূত নির্মাণ কাজ কেন ভাঙ্গিয়া ফেলা হইবে না তাহার কারণ দর্শানোর নির্দেশ দেওয়া যাইতেছে।

অথরাইজড অফিসার-২
নকশা অনুমোদন শাখা
রাজউক, ঢাকা”
41. Ultimately, making enquiry about the entire constructed building, the RAJUK came to the final decision mentioning those deviations. Thus, issuing final notice demolished those deviated portions on 23-9-2010 and 26-9-2010 and the RAJUK realized incurred costs thereof (Annexure-F series) from the developer (respondent No.4). Relevant portions of the RAJUK's letter dated 03-10-2010 is quoted herein below:

“বিষয়ঃ প্লট/দাগ নং-১৯, রোড নং-৭সি, সেক্টর-০৩, উত্তরা, ঢাকাতে বিদ্যমান ইমারতের নকশা বহির্ভূত নির্মাণ কাজ ভাঙ্গা/অপসারণ বাবদ খরচের টাকা মাঃ...............পরিশোধ প্রসঙ্গে।

উপরোক্ত বিষয় ও সূত্রের প্রেক্ষিতে জানানো যাইতেছে যে, রাজউকের প্রথম শ্রেণীর ম্যাজিস্ট্রেট এর নেতৃত্বে আইন শৃংখলা রক্ষা বাহিনীর উপস্থিতিতে গত ২৩-৯-২০১০ ও ২৬-৯-২০১০ ইং তারিখ আলোচ্য হোল্ডিং-এ বিদ্যমান ইমারতের নকশা বহির্ভূত নির্মাণ কাজ ভাঙ্গিয়া অপসারণ করে, উক্ত ভাঙ্গা/অপসারণ কার্যক্রম পরিচালনার জন্য রাজউকের টাকা = ১,১৮,০০০ মাঃ খরচ হইয়াছে যাহা পরবর্তীতে নির্মাতা/ব্যবহারকারী কর্তৃক পরিশোধযোগ্য। ভাঙ্গা বা অপসারণ বাবদ সমস্ত খরচ প্রদান করিতে আইনগত ভাবে বাধ্য রহিয়াছেন।

এমতাবস্থায় রাজউক কর্তৃক খরচকৃত টাকা আগামী ১০ (দশ) দিনের মধ্যে চেয়ারম্যান, রাজউক বরাবরে পে-অর্ডার/ব্যাংক ড্রাফট এর মাধ্যমে অগ্রণী ব্যাংক, রাজউক ভবন শাখা, ঢাকায় এ. টি. ডি. হিসাব নং-৩৫/৩৬০০০৪৭ এ জমা প্রদান করার জন্য আপনাকে অনুরোধ করা হইল। ব্যর্থতায় ইমারত নির্মাণ আইন, ১৯৫২ এর ৭ ধারার ক্ষমতাবলে ১৮৯৮ সনের ফৌজদারী কার্যবিধির ৩৮৬ ধারার বিধান মোতাবেক উল্লিখিত টাকা আদায়ের ব্যবস্থা গ্রহণ করা হইবে।

অথরাইজড অফিসার
রাজধানী উন্নয়ন কর্তৃপক্ষ
মহাখালী, ঢাকা”
42. Therefore, the allegations of deviation works in the building in question became a past and closed issue. After long time (i.e after 2 years) how the RAJUK again bring new allegations of different deviations of the same building. It is more surprising, because without referring to any particular enquiry or investigation the allegation as to deviation of column of building has been brought which is impossible by outside examination. Moreover, the person (developer) who constructed the building, without notifying him only serving notice upon the land owner the impugned action was taken although admittedly the land owner was not at all involved with the construction work of the building.

43. Thus, we are led to hold that the impugned order of cancellation of building plan purported to have been issued under section 9 of the Act, 1952 and the rule 29 (2) (kha) of the Rules, 2008 was issued without following the legal procedures provided under the Act, 1952.

44. Again, if we look into the background of this order, it appears that there has been a long standing dispute between the developer and the land owner due to which the land owner is unwilling to accept her proportionate flats and she purportedly cancelled the power of attorney given to the developer. Consequently, the petitioners (bonafide purchasers from the developer's proportionate share) did not get registered deed of sale although admittedly they got possession and have been enjoying their respective flats. In the prevailing situation, all the parties are now fighting under the umbrella of civil suits. In the circumstances, inspite of earlier enquiry into the building and thereby taking action finally for deviation by the notice of the year 2004 - 2005, the RAJUK has again issued impugned order raising different allegation of deviation to the very root of the building i.e column of the building without any enquiry and show cause notice upon the concerned persons in order to demolish the building.

45. We find another aspect that, the impugned order itself reflects the land owner's interest to demolish the building as she wrote letter to the RAJUK for taking the impugned decision of demolition of building as a whole and accordingly, she consented to the decision of the RAJUK. Thus, it is apparent that the impugned order is an out come of the disputes exist between the land owner and the developer and at the connivance of land owner, the RAJUK issued the impugned order of demolition of the building alleging deviations although the allegations of deviation of the building was a past and closed issue by taking action long back upon enquiry of the building. Thus, on a past and closed issue of deviation, after 7 years of earlier action, it is absolutely malafide and an out come of disputes between the parties i.e the developer and the land owner. Considering all the above facts and circumstances altogether, we have no hesitation to hold that the impugned order was issued for achieving some collateral purposes and so it is malafide. This view of ours finds support from the case reported in AIR, 1964 (Cal) 265 wherein it is held.

"Malafide does not necessarily involve a malicious intention. It is enough if the aggrieved party establishes; (1) that the authority making the impugned order did not apply its mind at all to the matter in question or (2) that the impugned order was made for a purpose or upon a ground other that what is mentioned on the face of the order."
46. The important question raised by the learned Advocate for the RAJUK as to maintainability of the writ petition because there is a specific provision under section 15 of the Act, 1952 providing forum of appeal against the action under section 9 of the Act, 1952. But without availing the said forum, the petitioners have filed this writ petition. In this context, Mr. Moyeen Firoze, the learned Advocate for the petitioners replies that although the petitioners as admitted occupiers of the schedule building, are required to be notified but having not been done they were not aware about the impugned order and so they could not prefer appeal within the stipulated period of 30 days under section 15 of the Act, 1952. He strengthens his submissions relying upon the case of Secretary, Ministry of Works, Government of Bangladesh vs Hasner Jahan Ahad reported in 6 BLC (AD) 111. He also submits that malafide being apparent in passing the impugned order, the petitioners can maintain this writ petition without preferring appeal. In this context, Mr. Firoze has cited some cases, in particular, 49 DLR 108, 6 BLC (AD) 111, 2001 BLD (HCD) 365, 9 BLT (HCD) 326, 33 DLR (AD) 161.

47. We have also gone through the cited cases as referred to by Mr. Imam Hasan, the learned Advocate for the respondent No.2 wherein the High Court Division held that section 15 of the Act, 1952 has to be availed by preferring appeal against the action of RAJUK. However, in this regard, we have gone through cited case reported in 6 BLC (AD) 111 wherein the apex Court held as under:

"The High Court Division made the Rule absolute relying upon certain decisions, in the case of Saleha Begum vs Chairman, First Court of Settlement reported in 49 DLR 243 and in the case of Jobon Nahar and others vs Bangladesh reported in 49 DLR 108 wherein it was held that ordinarily the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution will not interfere where there is equally effective and efficacious remedy available to a petitioner. Yet the existence of another remedy was not in every case bar to the exercise of power of the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution and the Court may interfere if the circumstance demand such interference. The High Court Division found that this case was such a case in that the property in question did not come within the definition of abandoned property. No notice was served under section 7 of President's Order 16 of 1972 on the occupant of the building and the petitioner had no means of knowing that the property was being treated as an abandoned property. Further, it was found that the writ petitioner and her predecessor, which was Eastern Housing Limited, had never left the country or abandoned the property."
48. Relying on the aforesaid ratio, here we find that firstly, the petitioners are occupiers of the building in question but due to non service of notice upon them under section 3B (1) of the Act, 1952 they were not aware about the impugned order passed on 10-12-2012. Secondly, we held above that there was malafide intention of landowner to evict the petitioners from the building due to her pending dispute with the developer and so, the land owner herself consented to issue the impugned order alleging some deviations in the building. Thirdly, earlier the allegations of deviation of the said building has already been settled by issuing notice in the year 2004-2005 and by demolishing deviated parts at the costs realized from the developer. Considering all these 3 (three) aspects, we are of the view that the writ petition is quite maintainable without preferring appeal under section 15 of the Act, 1952. This view of ours finds support in the case of Unique Hotel and Resorts Ltd and others vs Bangladesh and others reported in 15 BLC 771, Dr Nurul Islam vs Bangladesh and others reported in 33 DLR (AD) 201, Mohammad Amir Hossain vs Authorised Officer, RAJUK and another reported in 9 BLT (HCD) 326 and 1981 BLD (AD) 140 = 33 DLR (AD) 201. In particular, the cases reported in 1 BLC (AD) 161, 15 BLC 771 and 9 BLT (HCD) 326 are related to RAJUK action wherein the High Court Division entertained writ petition without preferring appeal under section 15 of the Act, 1952. Among those decisions, in the case reported in 15 BLC 771 their Lordships held as under:

"To all intents and purposes, in our assessment, the Environment Directorate and the RAJUK's impugned Memos dated 26-8-2009 and 7-9-2009 respectively are unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense. As the said Memos Dated 26-8-2009 and 7-9-2009 are malafide and without jurisdiction, Dr SA Mahmood was not required to approach the Appellate Authority either under Section 14 of the “পরিবেশ সংরক্ষণ আইন, ১৯৯৫” or under Section 15 of the Building Construction Act, 1952 and he rightly approached the High Court Division directly under Article 102 of the Constitution."
49. Although, Mr. Zead-al-Malum, the learned Advocate submits that earlier a writ petition was unsuccessfully filed by the respondent No.5 (developer) and so, this writ petition is not maintainable on the same cause. We find that the earlier writ petition was filed by the developer i.e respondent No.5 and not the petitioners. Moreover, in the said writ petition, the earlier action of the RAJUK taken in the year 2004-2005 was challenged but in this writ petition subsequent action taken in the month of December, 2012, a new cause of action has been challenged. Further, we discussed above that the RAJUK took action earlier in the year 2004-2005 regarding deviations and though the developer filed the earlier writ petition but during pendency of the said writ petition, the RAJUK demolished deviated portions of the building and realized costs from developer incurred for the said demolition works. Therefore, there is no nexus between the previous writ petition and the present writ petition and so, we are unable to accept the submission of Mr Zead-al-Malum, the learned Advocate for the respondent No.4.

50. Secondly, since the land owner is contesting the Rule as respondent No.4 we hold that without impleading her daughter, Shiban Akbar, the writ petition is quite maintainable.

51. As we are adjudicating only the propriety of issuance of the impugned order issued by the RAJUK, there is no disputed question of facts to come to the decision relating to this issue.

52. Mr. Zead-al-Malum next submits that second part of the Rule is being not pressed, the Rule as a whole cannot sustain. In this regard, we find that two parts of the Rule are quite different. The first part of the Rule is relating to propriety of the notice of demolition of building dated 10-12-2012. On the other hand, by the 2nd part of the Rule the petitioners sought a direction upon the RAJUK to approve the building layout plan by accommodating deviations (if any) of the building. In the second part, the petitioners have deliberately used the words "if any" relating to deviation. Since we hold that the alleged deviations were not detected in accordance with law, the 2nd part of the Rule is redundant. Therefore, we are of the view that the first part of the Rule has no nexus with the second part of the Rule and without second part, the first part of the Rule can be settled. Hence, the submission of Mr. Zead Al Malum has got no legs to stand.

53. We have also gone through the cases as cited by Mr. Zead-al-Malum. The facts of 62 DLR (AD) 260 (relating to principles of natural justice) and 69 DLR (AD) 440 (construction without permission does not create title) are different, these are not applicable in this particular case. Further 65 DLR (AD) 180 settled the ratio that ownership rights should be subject to the requirements of the statutory law prevailing in the country. VI ADC 872 relates to the facts where construction was made beyond approved building plan detailed in the investigation report and that the learned Advocate for the petitioner could not show breach of legal provisions. Thus, the facts and circumstances of the aforesaid cases are distinguishable from those of the case in hand.

54. Regard being had to the above, we are led to hold that the impugned order was issued without compliance with the required law incorporated in the Act, 1952. Moreover, malafide and connivance of landowner is apparent in passing the impugned order. In view of above discussions, we find merit in first part of the Rule.

55. In the result, the Rule is made absolute in part. The cancellation of approved building layout plan vide memo No. RAJUK/NaMa:Tha-2A.BC-(Part) 1828/99/861 dated 10-12-2012 issued by the RAJUK relating to plot No.19 Road-7/C, Section-3, Uttara Model Town, Dhaka is hereby declared to be without lawful authority and of no legal effect.

Communicate a copy of this judgment and order to the respondents at once.

End.
===End===

===75 DLR (HCD) 24===
High Court Division 
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)

Present:
Mr. Justice Mahmudul Hoque

Civil Revision No.91 of 2001

Tafiran Bewa and others
------------- Petitioners
VS
Joynal Abedin being dead his heirs: 1(a) Jahanara Begum and others
------- Opposite-Parties

Judgement Date : April 05, 2022

Counsels:
Humayun Kabir Sikder, Advocate
—For the Petitioners.

Moinuddin, Advocate
—For the Opposite-Party Nos.3-5, 6(a)-6(d), 7(a)-7(c), 8 and 9(ka)-9(ga).

Sikder Mahmudur Razi, Advocate
—For the Added-Opposite-Party Nos. 11-16.

Judgment
1. On an application under section 115(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure this Rule was issued at the instance of the petitioners calling upon the opposite party Nos.l-9 to show cause as to why the impugned judgment and decree dated 7-8-2000 passed by the learned Subordinate Judge (now Joint District Judge), 2nd Court, Bogura in Partition Appeal No.153 of 1994 allowing the appeal in part and thereby setting aside the judgment and decree dated 29-11-1988 passed by the learned Senior Assistant Judge, 1st Court, Bogura in Partition Suit No.600 of 1980 dismissing the suit should not be set-aside and/or pass such other or further order or orders as to this Court may seem fit and proper.

2. Shorn of unnecessary details, fact of the case lies in a very short compus. The predecessor of the petitioners on 22-11-1980 instituted Partition Suit No.600 of 1980 in the Court of Munsif, 2nd Court, Bogura for partition in respect of his shares in the suit land. Subsequently, the suit was transferred to the court of learned Senior Assistant Judge, 1st Court, Bogura. The plaint case in brief is that the suit land belonged to one Sona Pramanik, Pona Pramanaik and Abir Pramanik in 4 annas, 4 annas and 8 annas share respectively; Abir Pramanik died leaving his wife Saimon Bewa and son Salimuddin. Salimuddin died leaving his mother Salmon Bewa who died leaving brother Mozahar and sister Kariman. Mozahar and Kariman transferred 111/2 sataks of land in favour of the predecessor of the petitioners by a registered sale deed dated 3-2-1959; Sona Pramanik died leaving his bother Pona Pramanik as his heir. Pona Pramanik died leaving his wife Zarina Khatun, son Joynal @ Bishu and daughter Zamiran. Zamiran died leaving her husband Khudhu Pramanik, the original plaintiff and the predecessor of the petitioners and consanguine brother Joynal @ Bishu; Zarina died leaving her 2nd husband Riaz and 3 sons Abdul, Abdul Quddus and Joynal. Joynal @ Bishu transferred 111/2 sataks of land in favour of Khudhu Pramanik (predecessor of the petitioners) by a registered sale deed dated 31-10-1958. Joynal @ Bishu also transfered 0-005 and 0-002 sataks of land in favour of the predecessor of the petitioners by 2(two) registered deeds dated 26-10-1972 and 6-3-1981 respectively. Riaz died leaving 5 sons Nafizuddin, Habibur, Kafiluddin, Nazrul and Budha Pramanik and 3 daughters Firoza, Surjayaban, Anwara and wife Ezatun Bewa. The heirs of Riaz transferred 0.001 satak of land in favour of the predecessor of the petitioners by a registered sale deed dated 9-10-1980; in the aforesaid manner the predecessor of the petitioners became the owner of 0.28 sataks land. On 12-5-1980 the predecessors of the petitioners asked the opposite-parties to partition the suit land by metes and bounds but they refused and hence, the present suit.

3. The opposite-party No.1 and the predecessor of opposite-party Nos.2-9 as defendant No.1-2 contested the suit by filing two separate written statements denying the material facts of the plaint. The defendant No.1 stated that he purchased 0.02 sataks of land from Abdul and Abdul Quddus, the sons of Zarina (wife of Pona Pramanik) by two registered sale deeds both dated 12-5-1980 from plot No.79. Pona Pramanik transferred his entire share during his life time. Defendant No.1 possessed half of the land of plot No.79 and the remaining half being possessed by the predecessors of opposite-party Nos.2-9 and he prayed for a saham in respect of the share in the suit land. Defendant No.2, predecessor of opposite party Nos.2-9 stated that the suit land originally belonged to Abir, Pona and Sona in 8 annas, 4 annas and 4 annas shares respectively. Abir died leaving wife Saimon and son Salimuddin. Solemuddin died leaving his mother Saimon, Saimon died leaving brother Mozahar and sister Kariman as her heirs. Mozahar and Kariman transferred 0.021/2 sataks of land in favour of the predecessor of opposite-party Nos.2-9 by a registered sale deed dated 2-11-1970. Pona transferred 0.05 sataks of land in favour of Tamizuddin by a registered sale deed dated 18-1-1938. Tamizuddin died leaving his wife Oziman, son Namir and daughter Takiran and Namir died leaving his wife Aziman and son Aziz. Aforesaid heirs of Tamizuddin transferred 0.05 sataks of land in favour of Kawser and Ahammed Ali by a registered sale deed dated 19-12-1960. Ahammad Ali purchased the said land in Benami of his daughter Farida. Kawser and Ahammad Ali transferred the said land in favour of the predecessors of the opposite-party Nos.2-9 by a registered sale deed dated 19-11-1962. In the aforesaid manner the predecessor of the opposite-party Nos.2-9 became co-sharer in respect of 0.071/2 sataks land and after purchase she had been enjoying and possessing the same by constructing a pucca house and a saw-mill thereon.

4. The trial court framed 8(eight) issues for determination of the dispute. In course of hearing, both the parties examined witnesses as PWs and DWs and also submitted documents in support of their respective claim which were duly marked as Exhibits. The trial court upon hearing by its judgment and decree dated 29-11-1988 dismissed the suit.

5. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and decree of the trial court, the plaintiff preferred Partition Appeal No.153 of 1994 in the Court of learned District Judge, Bogura. Eventually, the said appeal was transferred to the Court of learned Subordinate Judge (now Joint District Judge), 2nd Court, Bogura for hearing and disposal who upon hearing by the impugned judgment and decree dated 7-8-2000 allowed the appeal and decreed the suit in part by setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial court. At this juncture, the plaintiff-appellant-petitioners, moved this Court by filing this revisional application and obtained the present Rule and order of stay.

6. Mr Humayun Kabir Sikder, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioners submits that the trial court dismissed the suit on the ground of under valuation of the suit and finding no cause of action as well as finding that the plaintiff could not prove his title in the suit property, but the appellate court while allowing the appeal rightly discussed all the evidences both oral and documentary and found title of the plaintiff in the suit property and allowed saham in part giving 173/4 sataks only miscalculating total quantum of land and also allowed saham to the defendant No.2 for 71/2 sataks which is beyond her entitlement, as such, the appellate court has committed an error in the decision occasioning failure of justice.

7. Mr Moin Uddin, learned Advocate appearing for the opposite-party Nos.3-5, 6(a)-6(d), 7(a)-7(c), 8 and 9(a)-9(ga) submits that there is no conflict in the genealogy as stated by the plaintiff in their plaint with the statement made by the defendant No.2, but the defendant No.1 introduced a new story that Pona Pramanik is cousin brother of Abir Pramanik which has no basis at all and he does not inherit any property of Salimuddin. He further submits that though the trial court on technical ground dismissed the suit but the appellate court while allowing the appeal rightly held and observed that the plaintiff in suit are entitled to get 173/4 sataks of land and accordingly gave saham to the plaintiff and rightly held that defendant No.2 predecessor of the opposite-parties entitled to get 71/2 sataks land but in the operative portion of the order no saham given to the defendant No.2. As such, the appellate court adjudicated the matter in dispute piecemeally only giving a portion of the suit property in the saham of the plaintiff.

8. He further submits that the defendant No.2 though purchased 71/2 sataks of land from plot No.98 which contain only 5 sataks land but since all the property is under a single holding and khatian No. 97 the defendant No.2 can claim 71/2 sataks of land from total land under khatian No.97, as the plaintiff and defendant No.1 admitted that the defendant No.2 has been possessing a portion of plot No.79, as such, the defendant No.2 though purchased the property from plot No.98 she is entitled to get her share from other plots under the same khatian.

9. Mr Sikder Mahmudur Razi, learned Advocate appearing for the added-opposite-party Nos.11-16 submits that the genealogy given by the plaintiff in the plaint and supported by the defendant No.2 are not wholly correct. He submits that admittedly the suit property under khatian No.97 comprising 4(four) plots originally belonged to Abir Pramanik 8 annas, Sona Pramanik and Pona Pramanik 4 annas each. Abir Pramanik died leaving wife Saimon and son Salimuddin. Sona Pramanik died leaving Pona Pramanik. Thereafter, Salimuddin died leaving mother Saimon and uncle Pona Pramanik who is Abir's cousin and in the absence of Salimuddin his mother Saimon inherited 1/3rd share and Pona Pramanik inherited the rest share of the property of Salimuddin. But the plaintiff as well as defendant No.2 claimed that Salimuddin died leaving only mother Saimon who got entire share of Salimuddin which is beyond record. He further submits that the defendant No.1 in his written statement at paragraph 8 specifically given such genealogy which had not been controverted by the plaintiff or the defendant No.2 bringing any evidence contrary to the facts stated in the written statement. Moreover, PW 1, DW 2 and 3 in their statements supported the genealogy given by defendant No.1.

10. He further submits that the trial court on a technical ground without entering into the merit and facts of the case dismissed the suit but the appellate court though allowed the appeal but wrongly calculated the share of the parties, moreover, failed to decide the claim of the defendant No.1 who acquired the property by inheritance. He submits that according to genealogy given by defendant No.1, the plaintiff in suit entitled to get 21.773 sataks out of which admittedly 1 satak acquired by the government leaving balance of 20.773 sataks in the share of the plaintiff. The defendant No.1 is entitled to get 1-216 sataks but he purchased and then transferred 2 sataks to the added-opposite-party Nos.11-16 in excess of his share and defendant No.2 by purchase only entitled to get 5 sataks land though she purchased 71/2 sataks from plot No.98 which contain only 5 sataks land, but the appellate court by miscalculation of share allotted saham to the plaintiff for 173/4 sataks instead of 20.773 sataks and failed to give saham to the defendant Nos.1 and 2 for any quantum of land though in its judgment observed that the defendant No.2 is entitled to get 71/2 sataks in the holding by purchase. Hence, the trial court has committed illegality in dismissing the suit and the appellate court though decreed the suit in part committed error in calculation of the share of the contending parties and wrongly allotted less share to the plaintiff and failed to give saham to the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as per their purchase.

11. Heard the learned Advocates of both the parties, have gone through the revisional application, plaint, written statement, evidences both oral and documentary and the impugned judgment and decree of both the courts below.

12. Admittedly, khatian No.97 plot Nos.79, 81, 83 and 98 contain 28 sataks of land. As per khatian Abir Pramanik son of Kadir Pramanik 8 annas, Sona Pramanik and Pona Pramanik 4 annas each, i.e, Abir Pramanik got 14 sataks and Sona and Pona Pramanik got 14 sataks. The plaintiff and the defendant No.2 claimed that Abir Pramanik died leaving wife Saimon and son Salimuddin and then Salimuddin died leaving his mother Saimon who inherited entire property left by Abir Pramanik. Thereafter, Saimon died leaving brother Mozahar and sister Kariman to inherit her.

13. On the other hand, defendant No.2 claimed that Sona Pramanik died leaving his full brother Pona Pramanik who got entire 14 sataks, then Pona Pramanik, during his life time, transferred 5 sataks of land under plot No.98 by a registered deed dated 18-1-1938 to one Tamizuddin Pramanik. Thereafter, Pona Pramanik died leaving wife Zarina, son Joynal and daughter Zamiran. Thereafter, Zamiran died leaving husband Khudu Pramanik, plaintiff of the suit and brother Joynal alias Bishu who inherited the share of Zamiran. Wife of Pona Pramanik named Zarina got second married with one Riaz Pramanik, she died leaving husband Riaz Pramanik, 2(two) sons by second husband namely Abdul and Abdul Quddus and one Joynal Abedin by her 1st husband. In the manner aforesaid Joynal Abedin alias Bishu inherited 5.25 sataks from father, 1.312 sataks from sister, 0.281 satak from mother totalling 6843 sataks, but he transferred 11.50 sataks land to the plaintiff by a registered deed dated 31-10-1958 which is more than his share. The plaintiff also purchased 2 sataks of land from plot Nos. 79, 81 and 83 from Joynal by a registered deed dated 6-3-1981. Earlier the plaintiff also purchased 1 satak of land by a registered deed dated 26-10-1972 from Joynal in excess of his share. The defendant No.2 also claimed that Riaz Pramanik died leaving 2 wives, 7 sons and 3 daughters. Aforesaid heirs of Riaz Pramanik transferred 1 satak of land by a registered deed dated 9-10-1980 to the plaintiff in excess of their share. Abdul and Abdul Quddus jointly inherited 0.058 sataks from Riaz Pramanik. The plaintiff can claim 19.878 sataks out of which 1 satak acquired by the government leaving 18.878 sataks and also admitted that the appellate court allotted saham to the plaintiff less than his share measuring 17.75 sataks instead of 18.878. The defendant No.2 though claimed that Pona Pramanik inherited no property from Salimuddin but could not prove the same.

14. The petitioner claimed that he is entitled to get 22.75 sataks in 3 suit plots by purchase and by inheritance and prayed for saham of the same. The defendant No.1 claimed that Salimuddin died leaving mother Saimon who got 1/3rd of his share and his uncle Pona Pramanik got the rest of his share and accordingly, Pona Pramanik got 7 sataks of his own, 7 sataks from his brother Sona and from Salimuddin 8.16 sataks totalling 22.16 sataks out of which during his life time he transferred 5 sataks of land of plot No.98 in the year 1938 to one Tamizuddin. After transfer Pona Pramanik had 17.16 sataks under plot Nos.79, 81 and 83 and died leaving wife Zarina, son Joynal and daughter Zamiran. Among them Zarina got 2.145 sataks, Joynal 10.01 sataks, Zamiran 5.005 sataks. Zamiran died leaving brother Joynal and husband Khudhu Pramanik of whom Joynal got 2.5025 sataks, Khudhu Pramanik got 2.5025 sataks. Zarina died leaving second husband Riaz, son Abdul and Abdul Quddus and Joynal who got 0.536 sataks each. Riaz died leaving Abdul and Abdul Quddus, along with other 5 sons, 3 daughters and wife. Abdul and Abdul Quddus got .144 satak the rest 0.392 sataks fell in the share of other heirs.

15. From perusal of evidences it appears that on the death of Abir Pramanik Saiman as wife got 1.75 sataks and as mother of Salimuddin got 4.08 sataks being 1/3rd of 12.25 sataks. Saimon died leaving brother Mozahar and sister Kariman who inherited entire share of Saimon measuring (4.08 + 1.75) = 5.83 sataks. In the manner aforesaid, Mozahar and Kariman got 5.83 sataks. Joynal alias Bishu by inheritance from father, mother and sister got (10.01 + 2.5025 + 0.536) = 13.0485 sataks, Khudhu Pramanik from his wife got 2.5025 sataks, Abdul and Abdul Quddus got 1.261 sataks, other heirs of Riaz got 0.392 sataks. The plaintiff Khudhu Pramanik by a registered deed No.16562 dated 31-10-1958 (Exhibit 2) purchased 11.5 sataks from Joynal Abedin alias Bishu from plot Nos.79, 81 and 83. Thereafter, he purchased 11.5 sataks of land from Mozahar and Kariman from plot Nos.79, 81 and 83 by registered deed No.1718 dated 3-2-1959 (Exhibit 1), wherein Mozahar and Kariman had title in 5.83 sataks only. Thereafter, the plaintiff purchased 1 satak of land from heirs of Riaz from the same plots by a registered deed No.19978 dated 9-10-1980 (Exhibit 3), whereas the vendor had title only in 0392 sataks. The plaintiff also purchased 2 sataks of land from same plots from Joynal Abedin by a registered deed No.5858 dated 6-3-1981 (Exhibit 4), wherein Joynal had no title to transfer as he transferred his share earlier to the plaintiff vide Exhibit 2. The plaintiff also purchased 1/2 satak of land from Joynal by a registered deed No.24949 dated 26-10-1972 (Exhibit 5), which is also beyond his share having no title to be transferred. Joynal in the manner stated above transferred in total 14 sataks of land by different deeds instead of his title in 13.0485 sataks. Nothing contrary to the facts could bring by the plaintiff and defendant No.2 to disprove the genealogy given by the defendant No.1.

16. As mentioned above the plaintiff is entitled to get 2.5025 sataks by inheritance from wife, 13.0485 sataks by purchase from. Joynal, 5.83 sataks by purchase from Mozahar and Kariman, 0.392 sataks by purchase from the heirs of Riaz Pramanik, totalling 21.773 sataks out of which 1 satak acquired by the government leaving 20.773 sataks in his share. Abdul and Abdul Quddus by inheritance only acquired 1.216 sataks of land but they transferred 2 sataks of land from plot No.79 to Joynal Abedin by registered deed Nos.12058 and 12060 both dated 12-5-1980 (Exhibits Ka and Ka(1) in excess of their share. Subsequently, said Joynal Abedin by a registered deed No.20319 dated 15-11-2000 assigned the same to father of the added-opposite-party Nos.11-16.

17. Defendant No.2 claim that Tamizuddin purchased 5 sataks of land from plot No.98 from Pona Pramanik by a registered deed No.272 dated 18-1-1938. Thereafter, heirs of Tamizuddin transferred the same to one Kawser Ali Sheikh and minor Farida Khatun by a registered deed No.23412 dated 31-12-1960 in which the plaintiff Khudhu Pramanik was an attesting witness. Subsequently, Kawser Ali and Farida Khatun transferred the said 5 sataks land under plot No.98 by a registered deed No.13984 dated 19-1-1962 (Exhibit Kha(1)) to defendant No.2, Sufia Khatun, predecessor of opposite-party Nos.2-9. Thereafter, as claimed by defendant No.2, she purchased 2.50 sataks of land under plot No.98 from Mozahar and Karimannessa by a registered deed No.24279 dated 2-11-1970 (Exhibit Kha).

18. From perusal of khatian No.97, it appears that in the khatian there are 4(four) plots, plot Nos.79, 5 sataks, 81, 2 sataks, 83, 16 sataks and 98 measuring 5 sataks totalling 28 sataks out of total land 5 sataks of land in plot No.98 transferred by Pona Pramanik during his life time in the year 1938 to one Tamizuddin. Subsequently, said 5 sataks of land purchased by defendant No.2, as such, there remains no property to be transferred by Karimannessa and Mozahar in the year 1970. Though the defendant No.2 claimed 71/2 sataks of land by purchase from plot No.98, there is no scope to give saham for the said quantum of land where plot No.98 only contain 5 sataks of land which was transferred by Pona Pramanik in the year 1938. Therefore, Mozahar and Kariman had no scope to transfer any property from plot No.98 to the defendant No.2. The defendant No.2 could have claimed such quantum of land if her deed contain all the 4(four) plots under khatian No.97 but in both the deeds of the year 1962 and 1970 (Exhibit Kha and Kha(1)) only plot No.98 has been mentioned. Therefore, the defendant No.2 though purchased 71/2 sataks of land by 2(two) registered deeds from Kawser Ali, Farida Khatun, Mozahar and Kariman but she is only entitled to get 5 sataks, purchased by registered deed of the year 1962 and by the deed of the year 1970 she acquired no more title in plot No.98.

19. Learned Advocate for the added-opposite-party Nos.11-16 by giving a genealogy candidly submits that the defendant No.1, Joynal Abedin though purchased 2 sataks of land from Abdul and Abdul Quddus, in fact, both the brothers were entitled to transfer only 1.216 sataks of land as per their share in the property but they transferred beyond their entitlement. And finally submits that as per genealogy and calculation of respective shares of the co-sharers the plaintiff only entitled to get 21.773 sataks under plot No.79, 81 and 83 out of which 1 satak acquired by the government leaving 20.773 sataks. Defendant No.1 is entitled to get 1.216 sataks under plot No.79 and defendant No.2 entitled to get 5 sataks under plot No.98. After distribution of the property there remains 0.011 sataks, the same is given in the share of defendant No. 1 (added defendant Nos.11-16) as they got less property than they purchased. But evidences led by the parties admitted that the defendant No.2 in possession of a portion of land under plot No.79 where she acquired no title by purchase.

<p>20. Apart from this Mozahar and Kariman transferred their share in excess, to the plaintiff by registered deed dated 3-2-1959 (Exhibit 1) and after transfer of their share they had no title in plot No.98 to be transferred to the defendant No.2 on 2-11-1970 (Exhibit Kha). For easy understanding a table of inheritance and transfers made is given below:</p>

<table border="1" style="border-collapse: collapse; font-family: &quot;Noto Sans Bengali&quot;, sans-serif; margin: 15px 0px; width: 100%;">
    <caption>৯৭নং খতিয়ানের ৪ দাগে মোট সম্পত্তির পরিমাণ-২৮ শতাংশ</caption>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">অজ্ঞাত</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="3" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">কাদের</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">তাবিয়া</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">আবির প্রামানিক<br />১৪শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">সোনা প্রামানিক<br />৭শ.</td>
            <td colspan="2" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">পানা প্রামানিক<br />৭শ.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">সায়মন (স্ত্রী)<br />১.৭৫শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">সলিমুদ্দিন (ছেলে)<br />১২.২৫শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">পানা প্রামানিক<br />(চাচাত ভাই)<br />৭শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">সায়মন (মা)<br />৪.০৮শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">পানা মাণিক<br />৮.১৬শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">সায়মন<br />১.৭৫+৪.০৮=৫.৮৩</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">মোজাহার (ভাই)</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">করিমণ (বোন)</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">পানা মাণিক (৭+৭+৮.১৬)= ২২.১৬। ২২.১৬ হইতে পানা ৯৮ দাগে ১৯৩৮ সালে ৫ শতক বিক্রয় করে। পানা মাণিকের বাকী জমির পরিমাণ (২২.১৬-৫)= ১৭.১৬ (যা ৭৯/৮1/৮৩ দাগে)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জরিনা (স্ত্রী)<br />২.১৪৫ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জয়নাল ওরফে বিশু (ছেলে)<br />১০.০১ শ.</td>
            <td colspan="2" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জমিরন (মেয়)<br />৫.০০৫ শ.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জয়নাল ওরফে বিশু (ভাই)<br />২.৫০২৫ শ.</td>
            <td colspan="2" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">খুদু মাণিক (স্বামী)<br />২.৫০২৫ শ.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জরিনা ২.১৪৫ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">দ্বিতীয় রিয়াজ (স্বামী)<br />০.৫৩৬ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">আব্দুল (পুত্র)<br />০.৫৩৬ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">আব্দুল কুদ্দুস (পুত্র)<br />০.৫৩৬ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">জয়নাল ওরফে বিশু (১ম স্বামীর পুত্র)<br />০.৫৩৬ শ.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">রিয়াজ<br />০.৫৩৬ শ.</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
            <td style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">&nbsp;</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">আব্দুল ও আব্দুল কুদ্দুস ও অন্য ৫ পুত্র, ৩ কন্যা ও ১ স্ত্রী (২য় স্ত্রী)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="2" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">আব্দুল ও আব্দুল কুদ্দুস পাবে ০.১৪৪ শ.</td>
            <td colspan="2" style="padding: 5px; text-align: center;">অন্যান্য ওয়ারিশরা পাবে ০.৩৯২ শ.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px;">
                মাজাহার + করিমন = ৫.৮৩ শতক<br />
                জয়নাল বিশু = ১০.০১ + ২.৫০২৫ + ০.৫৩৬ = ১৩.০৪৮৫ শ.<br />
                খুদু প্রামাণিক = ২.৫০২৫ শ.<br />
                আব্দুল ও আব্দুল কুদ্দুস = ১.২১৬ শ.<br />
                রিয়াজের অন্যান্য ওয়ারিশ = ০.৩৯২ শ.
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px;">
                ১) বাদী খুদু প্রামাণিক ১১.৫ শতক ক্রয় করে মাজাহার ও করিমন থেকে যার দাগ নং ৭৯/৮১/৮৩, দলিল নং ১৭১৮ তারিখ ৩-২-১৯৫৯ইং (টিকবে ৫.৮৩ শ.) [প্রদর্শনী-১]<br />
                ২) বাদী ১১.৫ শতক ক্রয় করে জয়নাল বিশু থেকে যার দাগ নং ৭৯/৮১/৮৩, দলিল নং ১৬৫৬২ তাং ৩১-১০-১৯৫৮ইং (সবটুকু টিকবে) [প্রদর্শনী-২]<br />
                ৩) বাদী ১ শতক ক্রয় করে রিয়াজের ওয়ারিশদের থেকে যার দাগ নং ৭৯/৮১/৮৩, দলিল নং ১৯৯৭৮ তাং ৯-১০-১৯৮০ ইং (টিকবে ০.৩৯২শ.) [প্রদর্শনী-৩]<br />
                ৪) বাদী ২ শতক ক্রয় করে জয়নাল বিশু থেকে যার দাগ নং ৭৯/৮১/৮৩, দলিল নং ৫৮৫৮ তাং ৬-৩-১৯৮১ (টিকবে ১.৫৪৮৫ শ.) [প্রদর্শনী-৪]<br />
                ৫) বাদী ০.৫ শতক ক্রয় করে জয়নাল বিশু থেকে যার দাগ নং ৭৯/৮১/৮৩, দলিল নং ২৪৯৪৯ তাং২৬-১০-১৯৭২ইং (টিকবে না) [প্রদর্শনী-৫]<br />
                জয়নাল বিশু মোট বিক্রি করে ১৪ শতক (টিকবে ১৩.০৪৮৫ শতক)<br />
                তাহলে বাদীর ৭৯/৮১/৮৩ দাগে মোট জমি [২.৫০২৫ (ওয়ারিশ) + ১৩.০৪৮৫ (খরিদ) + ৫.৮৩ (খরিদ) + ০.৩৯২ (খরিদ)] = ২১.৭৭৩ শতক (এক শতক একোয়ার হলে বাকী থাকে ২০.৭৭৩ শতক)<br />
                ৬) আব্দুল ও আব্দুল কুদ্দুস ১২০৫৮ এবং ১২০৬০ নং দলিল তারিখ ১২-৫-১৯৮০ইং মূলে ৭৯ দাগ থেকে ২ শতাংশ জমি বিক্রয় করে ১নং বিবাদী জয়নাল আবেদীনের নিকট [প্রদর্শনী-ক ও ক(১)] পরবর্তীতে জয়নাল আবেদীন ২০৩১৯ নং দলিল তারিখ ১৫-১১-২০০০ইং মূলে ১১-১৬ নং বিবাদীর পিতার নিকট বিক্রি করেন (মূলতঃ আব্দুল ও আব্দুল কুদ্দুস = ১.২১৬ শতক এর মালিক) (১১-১৬ নং বিবাদীর দখল ৭৯দাগে)
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td colspan="4" style="padding: 5px;">
                মোট জমি দাড়ায়ঃ<br />
                বাদীর ২০.৭৭৩ শতক<br />
                একোয়ারকৃত ১ শতক<br />
                ১নং বিবাদীর ১.২১৬ শতক<br />
                ২নং বিবাদীর ৫ শতক<br />
                মোট ২৭.৯৮৯ শতক
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

21. In view of the above situations, this Court finds that the appellate court while decreeing the suit in part miscalculated the share of the plaintiff as well as failed to give saham to the defendant Nos.1 and 2, as such, committed an error of law in the decision occasioning failure of justice.

22. Taking into consideration the above, this Court finds merit in the Rule as well as in the submissions of the learned Advocate for the petitioners.

23. In the result, the Rule is made absolute, however, without any order as to costs.

24. The judgment and decree of the trial court and appellate court are hereby set-aside and the suit is decreed in preliminary form in part allotting saham to the plaintiff for 20.773 sataks, saham to the assignee of the defendant No.1, the added-opposite-party Nos.11-16 for 1.227 sataks and 5 sataks to the defendant No.2.

25. The parties are hereby directed to get the property partitioned amicably within 60(sixty) days maintaining their respective possession so far as possible and practicable, failing which they will get the property partitioned through court in accordance with law.

26. Order of stay granted at the time of issuance of the Rule stand vacated.

Communicate a copy of the judgment to the Court concerned and send down the lower court records at once.

End.
===End===
