===20 SCOB (AD) 1===

APPELLATE DIVISION

Present:

Mr. Justice Syed Refaat Ahmed, Chief Justice

Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam

Mr. Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury

Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Haque

Mr. Justice S. M. Emdadul Hoque

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 64 OF 2024 WITH CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 63, 42 AND 39 OF 2024.

(From the judgment and order dated 30.10.2018 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018, Criminal Appeal Nos. 1676, 2292 and 2215 of 2018).

Begum Khaleda Zia alias Khaleda Zia (In Crl. A. Nos. 63-64 of 2024) ... Appellant.

Sharfuddin Ahmed (In Crl. A. No. 42 of 2024) ... Appellant.

Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal (In Crl. A. No. 39 of 2024) ... Appellant.

-Versus-

Durnity Daman Commission represented by its Chairman and another (In Crl. A. No. 64 of 2024) ... Respondents.

The State and another (In Crl. A. Nos. 63, 42, 39 of 2024) ... Respondents.

For the Appellant (In Crl. A. Nos. 63-64 of 2024): Mr. Zainul Abedin, Senior Advocate with Mr. A.M. Mahbub Uddin, Senior Advocate, Mr. Bodruddozza, Senior Advocate, Mr. Md. Ruhul Quddus, Senior Advocate, Mr. Sheikh Mohammad Zakir Hossain, Senior Advocate, Mr. Raghib Rouf Chowdhury, Senior Advocate, Mr. Kayser Kamal, Advocate, Mr. ASM Sazzad Haider, Advocate Mr. Kazi Akhter Hosain, Advocate and Mr. Mohammad Ali, Advocate instructed by Mr. Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record.

For the Appellant (In Crl. A. No. 42 of 2024): Mr. Md. Ruhul Quddus, Senior Advocate with Mr. ASM Sazzad Haider, Advocate and Mr. Kazi Akhter Hosain, Advocate instructed by Mr. Md. Helal Amin, Advocate-on-Record.

For the Appellant (In Crl. A. No. 39 of 2024):Mr. S.M. Shajahan, Senior Advocate with Mr. Kayser Kamal, Advocate instructed by Mr. M. Ashrafuzzaman Khan, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent No.1 (In Crl. A. No. 64 of 2024): Mr. Md. Ashif Hasan, Senior Advocate instructed by Ms. Sufia Khatun and Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocates-on-Record.

For Respondent No.2 (In Crl. A. No. 64 of 2024): Mr. Mohammad Arshadur Rouf, Additional Attorney-General, Mr. Aneek R. Hoque, Additional Attorney-General, Mr. Abdullah Al Mahmud, Deputy Attorney-General, Ms. Fatema Akter, Assistant Attorney-General, Mr. Ahmed Musunna Chowdhury, Assistant Attorney-General and Mr. Ahmed Abdullah Khan, Assistant Attorney-General instructed by Mr. Md. Helal Amin, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent No.1 (In Crl. A. No. 63 of 2024): Mr. Aneek R. Hoque, Additional Attorney-General, Mr. Abdullah Al Mahmud, Deputy Attorney-General, Ms. Fatema Akter, Assistant Attorney-General, Mr. Ahmed Musunna Chowdhury, Assistant Attorney-General and Mr. Ahmed Abdullah Khan, Assistant Attorney-General instructed by Mr. Md. Helal Amin, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent No.2 (In Crl. A. No. 63 of 2024): Mr. Md. Ashif Hasan, Senior Advocate instructed by Ms. Sufia Khatun and Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocates-on-Record.

For Respondent No.1 (In Crl. A. No. 42 of 2024):Mr. Aneek R. Hoque, Additional Attorney-General (appeared with the leave of the Court).

For Respondent No.2 (In Crl. A. No. 42 of 2024): Mr. Md. Ashif Hasan, Senior Advocate instructed by Ms. Sufia Khatun and Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocates-on-Record.

For Respondent No.1 (In Crl. A. No. 39 of 2024): Mr. Aneek R. Hoque, Additional Attorney-General, Mr. Abdullah Al Mahmud, Deputy Attorney-General, Ms. Fatema Akter, Assistant Attorney-General, Mr. Ahmed Musunna Chowdhury, Assistant Attorney-General and Mr. Ahmed Abdullah Khan, Assistant Attorney-General instructed by Mr. Md. Helal Amin, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent No.2 (In Crl. A. No. 39 of 2024):** Mr. Md. Ashif Hasan, Senior Advocate instructed by Ms. Sufia Khatun and Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocates-on-Record.


Date of hearing: 07-01-2025, 08-01-2025, 09-01-2025 & 14-01-2025

Date of judgment: 15-01-2025


JUDGMENT
Syed Refaat Ahmed, CJ:

1. The facts and issues in these cases are so inextricably entwined that these are necessarily, therefore, taken up for analogous consideration and disposal.

2. Criminal Appeal No. 64 of 2024 along with Criminal Appeal No. 63 of 2024, both preferred by Begum Khaleda Zia, alongside Criminal Appeal No. 42 of 2024, preferred by the Appellant Sharfuddin Ahmed, and Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024, preferred by the Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal, stem from Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeal Nos. 400 of 2019, 399 of 2019, 1371 of 2024, and 643 of 2019, respectively. These appeals challenge the judgment and order dated October 30, 2018, rendered by the High Court Division in Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018, in conjunction with Criminal Appeal Nos. 1676 of 2018, 2292 of 2018, and 2215 of 2018, wherein the Rule was made absolute and the appeals were dismissed.

3. The prosecution case as discerned from the records is that one Harunur Rashid, the then Sub-Assistant Director (later on promoted to Deputy Director) of the Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC), (Inquiry and Investigation-1), Head Office, Dhaka, acting as the informant, lodged a First Information Report (FIR) registered as Ramna Police Station Case No. 8 dated 3.7.2008 under sections 409 and 109 of the Penal Code, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (PCA, 1947) and Rule 5 of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007 against seven individuals, including the Appellants. The FIR implicated the Appellants alleging, inter alia, that Begum Khaleda Zia, in her capacity as Prime Minister from 1991 to 1996, had Current Account No. 5416 dated 2.6.1991 opened in the name of the 'Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund' at Sonali Bank, Ramna Branch, Dhaka. It was further alleged that an amount of USD 1,255,000 (equivalent to BDT 4,44,81,216/-) was deposited into the said Current Account through Pay Order No. 153367970 from the United Saudi Commercial Bank on 9.6.1991.

4. The gravamen of the charges and accusations brought forth was, therefore, of a criminal breach of trust or a fiduciary responsibility evident in alleged wrongful dealings in entrusted funds.

5. The case strung together against Begum Khaleda Zia is that she in her capacity as Prime Minister was entrusted with certain property, in the present case being a specific quantum of trust fund, and contended to have dominion over fund property long after she left public office and dealt with such entrusted property in a manner as is liable to bring such action under the mischief of the Penal Code's provisions criminalizing the act of "Criminal Breach of Trust" (section 409). Begum Zia is additionally alleged by the prosecution to have abetted irregular dealings in such entrusted property at all material times of her alleged sustained dominion over such property.

6. The offence of criminal breach of trust, it must be noted at the outset, has essential constituent elements prescribed by the law (i.e., section 405 of the Penal Code) as identifies illegal use of entrusted property for personal gain as the core element of the prosecution's case to satisfy the test of law. Central, therefore, to the establishment of such breach of trust is the violation of a fiduciary duty evident, for example, in a dishonest misappropriation or conversion for personal use or gain (as punished under section 403 of the Penal Code) or any other dishonest use or disposal of that property in violation of either the law or any contract.

7. The prosecution case further asserts that the Appellant, Begum Khaleda Zia, did not utilize the aforementioned funds for the benefit of any orphanage within the country between 9.6.1991 and 5.9.1993. Moreover, she neither formulated any rules for the administration of the said Orphanage nor adhered to the existing regulations concerning the operation and management of any orphanages or trusts as such. Instead, on 5.9.1993, she established the 'Zia Orphanage Trust' ('Trust') with the intent to dishonestly misappropriate the said amount through her family members. She registered the Trust at the Gulshan Sub-Registry Office under Registration No. IV-30, listing the address as 6, Shaheed Mainul Road, Dhaka. Subsequently, she nominated her elder son, Mr. Tarique Rahman, her younger son, late Arafat Rahman, and her sister-in-law's son, Mr. Mominur Rahman as members of the Board of Trustees. Furthermore, Mr. Tarique Rahman was designated as the author of the Trust (settlor). Thereafter, she opened STD Bank Account No. 7 on 9.10.1993 through Mr. Tarique Rahman in the name of the Trust at Sonali Bank, New North Circle Branch, Gulshan, Dhaka, and transferred BDT 2,33,33,500/- from Current Account No. 5416 of the 'Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund' to STD Account No. 7 of the Trust through cheque number 8431103 dated 13.11.1993 for the establishment of an orphanage in Bogura. Subsequently, on 4.2.1993 BDT 4,00,000/- was withdrawn from the said account, however, only BDT 2,77,000/- was spent to purchase 2.79 acres of land in the name of the Trust in Bogura. The remainder of the amount remained unspent for a considerable period, eventually accruing interest to reach BDT 3,37,09,757.32/- as of 12.4.2006.

8. The prosecution argued that the Appellant, Begum Khaleda Zia, at that juncture and with the fraudulent intent of misappropriating the sum of BDT 3,37,09,757.32 standing in STD Account No. 7, in collusion with other Appellants, issued five cheques totaling BDT 3,30,00,000/-. The contention is that these transactions were predominantly executed through Mr. Tarique Rahman and Mr. Mominur Rahman. They in turn instructed the Appellant, Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal to open Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDRs) at Prime Bank Limited, Gulshan Branch. Consequently, Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal received all the aforementioned cheques and subsequently deposited them at Prime Bank Limited, Gulshan Branch. Thereafter, he directed the then Manager of the Branch, Mahmood Hossain to open FDR accounts upon the encashment and collection of the said cheques.

9. Out of the aforementioned cheques, Cheque No. 4882407 for an amount of BDT 50,00,000/- dated 12.4.2006 was encashed on 13.4.2006, and FDR No. 41029462 was opened on the same day in the name of the Appellant, Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal. Subsequently, the said FDR was encashed and a new FDR being No. 41033338 for BDT 50,68,450/- inclusive of interest, was opened on 16.7.2006 in the name of the Trust.

10. Further, Cheque No. 4882406 for BDT One crore dated 15.6.2006 was encashed on the same date and FDR No. 41032276 was opened in the name of Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal. Another cheque being No. 4882403 for BDT One crore dated 15.6.2006 was received by way of account payee transfer to the Trust and FDR No. 41032669 dated 27.6.2006 was opened in the name of the Trust.

11. The remaining two cheques dated 4.7.2006 and 5.7.2006 for amounts of BDT 50,00,000/- and BDT 30,00,000/- respectively were also credited via account payee transfer to the Trust and a consolidated FDR being No. 4103317 for BDT 80,00,000/- was opened on 9.7.2006 in the name of the Trust.

12. Subsequently, pursuant to an oral instruction from the Appellant, Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal and an alleged purported resolution passed by the Board of Trustees of the Trust, Prime Bank Limited, Gulshan Branch, transferred two FDRs- one for BDT One Crore in the name of the Trust and another for the same amount in the name of the Appellant, Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal- to Prime Bank Limited, Eskaton Branch, through inter-bank credit advice. At the Eskaton Branch, an FDR bearing No. 41022619/73193, amounting to BDT 1,03,19,365/- inclusive of interest, was opened on 16.11.2006 in the joint names of the Appellant, Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal, and Syed Ahmed alias Sayeed Ahmed.

13. Another FDR bearing No. 41024435/73491 for BDT 1,06,38,686/- was opened on 7.2.2007 in the name of Gias Uddin Ahmed. Subsequently, the FDR held jointly in the names of Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal and Syed Ahmed was encashed and a fresh FDR being No. 41025511 for BDT 1,04,32,957.80/- inclusive of interest was opened on 7.2.2007 in the name of Gias Uddin Ahmed. Thereafter, Gias Uddin Ahmed encashed the aforementioned two FDRs on 15.2.2007 and caused the total amount of BDT 2,10,71,643.80/- to be issued in his name through six pay orders. The entirety of the proceeds was subsequently deposited into Current Account No. 11013134 of Prime Bank Limited, Eskaton Branch, belonging to his brother, Sharfuddin Ahmed. Subsequently, the total amount of BDT 2,10,71,643.80/- was withdrawn from the account of Sharfuddin Ahmed and allegedly misappropriated. Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal, in his capacity as the Chairman of Prime Bank Limited and wielding significant influence over the Branch Managers, is said to have, therefore, facilitated the opening of all the FDRs, their subsequent encashment and the eventual deposit of the proceeds into the account of Sharfuddin Ahmed. Thus comes to rest the story of the Appellants and the alleged misappropriation of the entire aforementioned sum of money.

14. Upon completion of the investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted a charge sheet, being Charge Sheet No. 372 dated 5.8.2009 against six accused persons, including the Appellants, under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947. The case record was subsequently forwarded to the learned Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, who, by an order dated 7.9.2009, took cognizance of the offences against the Appellants and the other accused persons. Thereafter, the case was transferred to the Special Judge Court No. 3, Dhaka, for trial, where it was registered as Special Case No. 3 of 2010. On 19.3.2014, the learned Special Judge, Court No. 3, Dhaka, framed charges against the Appellants and the other accused persons under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947. The charges were duly read over and explained to the accused persons, to which they all pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried in accordance with law. Thereafter, the case was eventually transferred from the Special Judge Court No.3, Dhaka to the Special Judge Court No. 5, Dhaka for holding trial and the same was renumbered as Special Case No. 17 of 2017.

15. During the course of the trial, the prosecution examined thirty-two witnesses out of the thirty-six listed. The Appellants cross-examined certain witnesses, while declined to cross-examine others. Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia cross-examined twenty-three witnesses yet opted not to examine any defence witnesses. In contrast, Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal examined one defence witness, while Appellant Sharfuddin Ahmed examined three defence witnesses in support of their respective cases. Upon the conclusion of the examination of witnesses, the Appellants were examined under section 342 of the CrPC, during which they categorically asserted their innocence of the charges brought against them.

16. The defence case, as articulated by the Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia in her statement read out in Court and as reflected in the tenor of the cross-examination of prosecution witnesses conducted by the Counsel for the Appellants, may be summarized as follows: No fund exists under the name of the 'Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund', and Begum Khaleda Zia neither had any involvement in the opening of Bank Account No. 5416 in the name of the purported fund, nor in the transfer of any money from the said account. It is further contended that the fund in question was brought by late Mr. Mustafizur Rahman, the then Foreign Minister, from the Emir of Kuwait as a donation intended for the welfare of orphans in Bangladesh, established in the name of late President Ziaur Rahman. The Appellant maintains her innocence, claiming that the case was instituted against her with mala fide intent, motivated by political considerations aimed at harassing her, and tarnishing her public image. She has unequivocally stated that she was neither the settlor, nor a trustee, nor a beneficiary of the Trust in question. The defence stance of the other Appellants aligns with that of Begum Khaleda Zia. They contend that no misappropriation of funds occurred, and no offence was committed as alleged in the FIR.

17. Upon the conclusion of the trial, the learned Special Judge of Special Judge Court No. 5, Dhaka, by judgment and order dated 8.2.2018 convicted the Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia under sections 409 and 109 of the Penal Code. She was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for a term of five years and directed to pay a fine of BDT 2,10,71,643.80/- to be borne equally by all the convicted persons. The remaining Appellants were convicted under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code and each was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for a term of ten years. Additionally, they were ordered to jointly pay the fine of BDT 2,10,71,643.80/- to be equally shared by all the convicted individuals.

18. Being dissatisfied with the sentence imposed upon Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia, which the Respondent 'Durnity Daman Commission' or the ACC deemed inadequate, the Commission filed Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018 before the High Court Division seeking an enhancement of the sentence and, accordingly, obtained a Rule. Concurrently, being discontented with the judgment and order dated 8.2.2018 Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia preferred Criminal Appeal No. 1676 of 2018 before the High Court Division challenging her conviction and sentence. Additionally, Appellant Sharfuddin Ahmed, aggrieved by the same judgment and order filed Criminal Appeal No. 2292 of 2018, while Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal preferred Criminal Appeal No. 2215 of 2018, both before the High Court Division, contesting their respective convictions and sentences.

19. The High Court Division, after hearing Criminal Appeal No. 1676 of 2018 together with Criminal Appeals No. 2215 of 2018 and No. 2292 of 2018 and Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018, analogously dismissed the appeals and made the Rule absolute in Criminal Revision on 30.10.2018. The High Court Division convicted Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia under section 409 of the Penal Code as well as section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947. Consequently, her sentence was enhanced to rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten years, and the fine imposed by the learned Special Judge was upheld.

20. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High Court Division, the Appellants preferred Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 400 of 2019, 399 of 2019, 1371 of 2024, and 643 of 2019 before this Division. Upon due consideration, leave was granted in all the petitions primarily on the grounds that the petitions had merit for consideration.

21. The facts-in-common providing the essential premise for CPLA Nos. 399 and 400 of 2019 filed on behalf of the Petitioner-Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia, the leave granting orders dated 11.11.2024 in both petitions record identical statements as to the case argued in defence before the High Court Division disposing of Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018 with Criminal Appeal Nos. 1676 of 2018, 2215 of 2018 and 2292 of 2018. That statement-in-common featuring in both leave granting orders is reproduced hereinbelow:

"The defence case, as it transpires from the statement of the petitioner which was read out by her in Court and the trend of cross-examination of the witnesses, in brief, is that there is no such fund as PM's Orphanage Fund and she was never involved with the opening of the Bank Account being No. 5416 in the name of Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund or the transfer of money from the said account. Late Mustafizur Rahman, the then Foreign Minister, brought the said fund from the Amir of Kuwait who donated the same for the well-being of the orphans in Bangladesh in the name of the President Ziaur Rahman. She is innocent and this case has been initiated against her for political harassment and to tarnish her image before the countrymen. She was neither the settlor, nor a trustee, nor a beneficiary of the said Trust."

22. In CPLA No. 400 of 2019 arising out of Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018 dealing with the issue of enhancement of the sentence of the Petitioner-Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia. The grounds taken were-

I. For that the High Court Division committed error of law in enhancing the sentence of the petitioner without any reasons or observation as to why the sentence of the learned Special Judge, Special Judge Court No.5, Dhaka in Special Case No. 17 of 2017 was considered as inadequate;

II. For that the High Court Division committed error of law in enhancing the sentence of the petitioner to 10 years of rigorous imprisonment merely on the ground that since other convicts were awarded 10 years of rigorous imprisonment, the petitioner was also required to be awarded the same sentence, without considering the lack of the evidence of involvement of the petitioner in the alleged offence;

III. For that the High Court Division committed an error of law in convicting the petitioner by holding that it was her obligation "to secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained as no such requirement exists either under section 5(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code;

IV. For that no documentary evidence having been adduced to indicate the aims and objects of the entrustment, the High Court Division committed error of law in holding that the fund was dealt with contrary to the aims and objects of the entrustment;

V. For that enhancement of sentence can be made only in appeal against the original Judgment passed in general law in view of Section 423(bb) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but the petitioner has been convicted under Section 409 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 against which appeal lies under Section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958. However, Section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 provides no provision for enhancement of sentence under that Act and as such, the Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018 filed by the Anti-Corruption Commission is void ab initio. Consequently, the Judgment and order passed by the High Court Division convicting the petitioner and others under Section 409 of the Penal Code read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 is liable to be vitiated as a whole;

VI. For that section 439(5) of the Code of Criminal Procedure clearly bars revision where appeal lies but the respondent being misconceived of law filed revision for enhancement of sentence which is not sustainable in law and as such, the Judgment and order of conviction and sentence of the petitioner is liable to be set aside as a whole.

23. On the other hand, the grounds taken in CPLA No. 399 of 2019 filed against the High Court Division's judgment and order dated 30.10.2018 affirming the conviction and enhancing the sentence of the Petitioner were-

I. Because the judgment and order of the High Court Division affirming the conviction of the petitioner and enhancing her sentence is based on (a) errors of law; and (b) misconceived views of law; and (c) gross non-reading and misreading of evidence on record; and (d) insufficient and/or no evidence on record and (e) bias and (f) the same is predicated upon fallacious presumptions and perverse reasoning, and as such, the judgment and order of the High Court Division is bad and unsustainable in law.

II. Because the judgment of the High Court Division is engulfed in errors of law in that:

a. For 'criminal breach of trust' to be proved there has to be proof of entrustment, misappropriation, conversion to one's dishonest own use, dishonest use or disposal of the property or willfully causing any other person to do any such act. In the process, one must gain unlawfully. In the instant case there is clear evidence on record that the fund in question is still intact and there has been no misappropriation or conversion or use or disposal of the fund for anyone's gain. The High Court Division, in the absence of any evidence of any such 'gain' of the petitioner or any one, has erroneously made up a case that the fund had not been used for 13 years and therefore, the offence of criminal breach of trust has been committed.

b. the High Court Division made an error in analyzing section 5(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 holding that the petitioner 'allowed' others to dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriate the fund while there is convincing evidence on record that the fund in question remains intact in the account of the Zia Orphanage Trust and there is no evidence on record that any person was ever benefited or gained from any transaction of the funds of the said trust or any person enjoyed the fund of the said trust in any manner.

c. the High Court Division has referred the notions of belief or observation of 'prudent' and 'reasonable' man in the judgment disregarding and ignoring that the standard of proof demanded in any criminal trial is that of proving facts 'beyond reasonable doubt'.

d. The High Court division wrongly shifted the burden of proof to the defense erroneously holding that the Appellant-Petitioner had 'entrustment' and control and domain over the fund without first establishing the same by clear and cogent evidence. Moreover, the defense was also denied of the opportunity to adduce additional evidence to prove its version of the facts.

e. The High Court Division has assailed Appellant-Petitioner for 'deliberate inaction' regarding the non- use of the trust fund. The High Court Division is palpably wrong in coming to such conclusion since (i) the petitioner had no connection with the Sonali Bank Account and (ii) even if it is accepted arguendo that the petitioner had knowledge of transfer of funds to Zia Orphanage trust, she had no reason and legal obligation to supervise the conduct of a private trust fund as the Prime Minister of Bangladesh.

f. The High Court Division's finding that the Zia Orphanage Trust is a "paper trust" is a wrong finding under the Trust Act and as per the evidence on record. Merely because a 'trust' or any legal entity remains dormant for some time, does not render a trust 'paper trust' or non-entity in law. The Zia orphanage Trust in its attempt to commence activity purchased a piece of land in Bogura measuring 2.79 acres.

g. the High Court Division committed error of law in convicting the Appellant-petitioner by holding that it was her obligation "to secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained as no such requirement exists either under section 5(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code.

h. the High Court Division committed error of law in holding that the "non-functioning of the Trust and keeping the fund in the account of the said Trust for long 13 years" amounted to act and omission of inaction on the part of the petitioner allowing to cause wrongful gain of others which constituted act of misappropriation, whereas an omission/inaction in respect of any fund by way of entrustment cannot be regarded as misappropriation or breach of trust in law; rather requires some positive act on the part of a person entrusted with the fund.

24. It is to be noted that earlier on 19.8.2024 this Division was in seisin of two Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeal being Nos. 643 of 2019 and 1371 of 2024 filed by Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal and Sharfuddin Ahmed respectively. Both Petitioners being aggrieved by the High Court Division's judgment and order dated 30.10.2018 analogously disposing of Criminal Appeal Nos. 2215 and 2292 of 2018 respectively cited grounds on the basis of which leave was granted in each case to prefer appeals being Criminal Appeals Nos. 39 and 42 of 2024 respectively. The grounds taken in CPLA No. 643 of 2019 are:

I. For that upon finding on an offence of abetment of criminal breach of trust, the High Court Division should have been satisfied that the convict-petitioner either instigated the principal offender, Begum Khaleda Zia to commit criminal breach of trust or engaged with her in any conspiracy and as result of which criminal breach of trust. The High Court Division, without being satisfied as to the basic principles of actus reus (external element) and mens rea (mental element) elements of the offence of abetment under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code, came to an erroneous conclusion that the convict-petitioner abetted criminal breach of trust. Hence, the judgment and order of conviction and sentence is liable to be set aside.

II. For that section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860 stipulates that intentional aiding, conspiracy or instigation is not enough to constitute the offence of abetment of criminal breach of trust and the prosecution has to prove that criminal breach of trust took place as a consequence of such conspiracy, intentional aiding or instigation.

III. For that when the amount of Tk. 2,33,33,500/- was transferred in 1993 from Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund to Zia Orphanage Trust through criminal breach of trust or misappropriation, it became stolen property as per section 410 of the Penal Code.

IV. For that the High Court Division found that the transactions that took place between 1993 and 2007 was a single transaction. That being so, the nature of the offence committed by each of the participants may be different depending on the facts of the case. Since the convict-petitioner received stolen property, he should have been charged and tried only under section 411 of the Penal Code 1860 for handling stolen property. Hence, the judgment and order of the High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

25. The grounds taken in CPLA No. 1371 of 2024 are:

I. For that the convict-petitioner had nothing to do with the fund as he is admittedly not a trustee of the Zia Orphanage Trust. Ingredients or elements of offence under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code or element of any offence under any law has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt against the convict-petitioner.

II. For that the prosecution case is unspecific, vague and ambiguous. The prosecution failed to prove the ingredients of section 409 or section 109 of the Penal Code against the convict-petitioner beyond reasonable doubt.

III. For that the convict-petitioner is not a merchant or agent and he not being a merchant or agent, he cannot be tried for commission of offence under section 409 of the Penal Code and as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence against the petitioner is liable to be set aside.

IV. For that the prosecution has failed to prove any entrustment of property upon the convict-petitioner or entrustment of any dominion over property in any manner defined under section 405 of the Penal Code or dishonest misappropriation of property as defined under section 403 of the Penal Code.

26. Consequently, Criminal Appeal Nos. 63, 64, 42, and 39 of 2024 were instituted before this Division. These appeals, having arisen from the same judgment, were heard analogously by this Division.

27. This Division being asked to take up first Criminal Appeal No. 64 of 2024 stemming from CPLA No. 400 of 2019, Mr. Zainul Abedin, the learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia, along with other learned Senior Advocates Mr. A. M. Mahbub Uddin, Mr. Bodruddozza, Mr. Md. Ruhul Quddus, Mr. Kayser Kamal, and Mr. Kazi Akhtar Hosain, the learned Advocate made submissions asserting that the High Court Division erred in law by enhancing the Appellant's sentence without providing reasons or observations as to why the sentence imposed by the learned Special Judge, Special Judge Court No. 5, Dhaka, in Special Case No. 17 of 2017 was deemed inadequate. They contended that the High Court Division further erred in law by enhancing the Appellant's sentence to ten years of rigorous imprisonment solely on the basis that other convicts were awarded the same sentence. Additionally, they argued that the High Court Division erred in law by convicting the Appellant on the grounds that she was obligated to ensure the proper use and welfare of the obtained funds even given that no such requirement exists either under section 5(1) of PCA, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code. Moreover, they highlighted that no documentary evidence was presented to indicate any declared aims and objectives of the entrustment, and thus, the High Court Division erred in law by holding that the funds were dealt with contrary to the aims and objectives of the entrustment. They further skillfully argued that the enhancement of the sentence can only be made in an appeal against the original judgment under general law in view of section 423(bb) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC). However, the Appellant was convicted under section 409 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947, against which an appeal otherwise lies under section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958. Since section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 provides no provision for the enhancement of the sentence under that Act, the Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018 filed by the ACC is void ab initio. Consequently, the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division convicting the Petitioner-Appellant and others is liable to be vitiated as a whole. They also contended that section 439(5) of the CrPC clearly bars revision where an appeal lies, but the ACC, being misconceived of the law, filed a revision for the enhancement of the sentence, which is not sustainable in law. Thus, they have vigorously argued for the judgment and order of conviction and the sentence to be set aside in their entirety.

28. The same set of lawyers appearing for the Appellant, Begum Khaleda Zia in Criminal Appeal No. 63 of 2024 stemming from CPLA No. 399 of 2019 made submissions stating, inter alia, that the judgment of the High Court Division affirming her conviction on the charge of criminal breach of trust and enhancing her sentence is based on (a) errors of law, (b) misconceived views of law, (c) gross non-reading and misreading of evidence on record, (d) insufficient and/or no evidence on record, (e) bias, and (f) predicated upon fallacious presumptions and perverse reasoning, and as such, the judgment and order of the High Court Division are bad and unsustainable in law. In substantiation, the learned lawyers have strenuously argued that the judgment of the High Court Division is engulfed in errors of law for the reasons below:

a. As 'criminal breach of trust to be proved there has to be proof of entrustment, misappropriation, conversion to one's dishonest own use, dishonest use or disposal of the property or willfully causing any other person to do any such act. In the process, one must gain unlawfully. In the instant case there is clear evidence on record that the fund in question is still intact and there has been no misappropriation or conversion or use or disposal of the fund for anyone's gain. The High Court Division, in the absence of any evidence of any such 'gain' of the Appellant or any one, has erroneously made up a case that the fund had not been used for thirteen years and, therefore, the offence of criminal breach of trust has been committed.

b. The High Court Division made an error in analyzing section  of the PCA, 1947 holding that the Petitioner-Appellant 'allowed' others to dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriate the fund while there is convincing evidence on record that the fund in question remains intact in the account of the Trust and there is no evidence on record that any person was ever benefited or gained from any transaction of the funds of the said trust or any person enjoyed the fund of the said trust in any manner.

c. The High Court Division has employed the tests of the belief or observation of the 'prudent' and 'reasonable' man in the judgment disregarding and ignoring that the standard of proof demanded in any criminal trial is that of proving facts 'beyond reasonable doubt'.

d. The High Court Division wrongly shifted the burden of proof to the defence erroneously holding that the Appellant had 'entrustment' and control and domain over the fund without first establishing the same by clear and cogent evidence. Moreover, the defence was also denied of the opportunity to adduce additional evidence to prove its version of the facts.

e. The High Court Division has assailed the Appellant for 'deliberate inaction' regarding the non-use of the trust fund. The High Court Division is palpably wrong in coming to such conclusion since (i) the Appellant had no connection with the Sonali Bank Account and (ii) even if it is accepted arguendo that she had knowledge of the transfer of funds to Trust, she had no reason and legal obligation to supervise the conduct of a private trust fund as the Prime Minister of Bangladesh.

f. The High Court Division's finding that the Trust is a "paper trust" is a wrong finding under the Trusts Act, 1882 and as per the evidence on record. Merely because a 'trust' or any legal entity remains dormant for some time, does not render a trust 'paper trust' or a non-entity in law. This Court is reminded in this regard that the Trust in its attempt to commence activity purchased a piece of land in Bogura measuring 2.79 acres.

g. The High Court Division committed error of law in convicting the Appellant by holding that it was her obligation to secure due welfare and proper use of the fund obtained given that no such requirement exists either under section  of either the PCA, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code.

h. The High Court Division committed error of law in holding that the "non-functioning of the Trust and keeping the fund in the account of the said Trust for long 13 years" amounted to act and omission/inaction on the part of the Appellant allowing to cause wrongful gain of others which constituted act of misappropriation, whereas an omission/inaction in respect of any fund by way of entrustment cannot be regarded as misappropriation or breach of trust in law, rather the act of misappropriation necessarily incorporates an element of a positive act on the part of a person entrusted with the fund.

29. Mr. Ruhul Quddus, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the convict-Appellant Sharfuddin Ahmed in Criminal Appeal No. 42 of 2024 has made submissions on the grounds that the said Appellant had nothing to do with the fund as he is admittedly not a trustee of the Trust and that the ingredients or elements of the offence under sections 409 read with 109 of the Penal Code or element of any offence under any law have not been proved beyond reasonable doubt against him. Mr. Quddus further submits that the prosecution case is unspecific, vague and ambiguous and that the prosecution failed to prove the ingredients of either section 409 or section 109 of the Penal Code against the said Appellant beyond reasonable doubt. In this regard it is emphasized that the Appellant is not a merchant or agent and, therefore, cannot be tried for commission of offence under section 409 of the Penal Code and as such, the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence against him are liable to be set aside. Highlighted also is the fact that the prosecution has failed to prove any entrustment of property upon this Appellant or any control or any dominion over such property in any manner defined under section 405 of the Penal Code or dishonest misappropriation of property as defined under section 403 of the Penal Code.

30. Mr. S.M. Shajahan, learned Senior Advocate with Mr. Kayser Kamal, learned Advocate on behalf of the Appellant Qazi Saleemul Huq alias Qazi Kamal in Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024 has made submissions stating that in arriving at a finding of an offence of abetment of criminal breach of trust, the High Court Division lost sight of the essential fact that this particular Appellant neither instigated the alleged principal offender, Begum Khaleda Zia to commit criminal breach of trust nor engaged with her in any conspiracy resulting in any criminal breach of trust. Instead, the High Court Division, without being satisfied as to the basic principles of actus reus (external element) and mens rea (mental element) elements of the offence of abetment under sections 409 and 109 of the Penal Code read together, came to an erroneous conclusion that this Appellant abetted the offence of criminal breach of trust. Hence, Messrs. Shajahan and Kamal argue, the judgment and order of conviction and sentence in this instance as well are liable to be set aside given that section 109 of the Penal Code stipulates that intentional aiding, conspiracy or instigation is not enough to constitute the offence of abetment of criminal breach of trust and the prosecution has to go the extra length to prove that criminal breach of trust took place as a consequence of such conspiracy, intentional aiding or instigation.

31. The grounds posited on the other hand by the Respondents, including the ACC, in each instances merit recording here before a consideration of the positioning of all parties concerned is undertaken on matters of fact and law. A snapshot of such grounds are, accordingly, provided below:

Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 1, State

32. The judgment and order of trial court was based on documentary, oral and material evidences available on record which supported the prosecution case while the defence failed to prove his case. Therefore, the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division deserves to be affirmed by this Court.

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 2, ACC

33. In order to constitute an offence under section 409 of the Penal Code there must be the allegation of entrustment of property or dominion over in someone's capacity of being a public servant or banker and misappropriation thereof, however, in absence of either of the aforesaid two ingredients the offence is not complete. Therefore, the appeal may be disposed of on merit for the ends of justice.

Criminal Appeal No. 64 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 1, State

Similar to Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 2, ACC

34. In view of section 423 (bb) of CrPC the enhancement of sentence can be made only in appeal against the judgment and order of sentence passed by the trial court under general law. However, in the case in hand the Appellant was convicted under section 409 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947 against which appeal lies under section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958. Therefore, the appeal may be disposed of on merit for the ends of justice.

Criminal Appeal No. 63 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 1, State

Similar to Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 2, ACC

35. In order to constitute an offence under section 409 of the Penal Codethere must be the allegation of entrustment of property or dominion over in someone's capacity of being a public servant or banker and misappropriation thereof, however, in absence of either of the aforesaid two ingredients the offence is not complete.

36. An essential ingredient of offence under section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947 is that there must be the allegation of accepting or obtaining any gratification other than legal remuneration or dishonest or fraudulent misappropriation or receipt of pecuniary advantage by the public servant. In order to prove the same the accused person or any other person on his behalf shall have in possession, for which the accused person cannot satisfactorily account of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his known source of income. Therefore, the appeal may be disposed of on merit for the ends of justice.


Criminal Appeal No. 42 of 2024

Grounds taken by the Respondent No. 2, ACC

Similar to Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 2024

37. Possessed of such facts agitated and legal tenets enunciated, this Division is, however, constrained to preliminarily opine that the facta probabilia' of these appeals taken together cumulatively gravitate towards the attraction first and foremost of the Trusts Act, 1882 to these cases, an inevitability which inexplicably has eluded the courts below. It is to that lapse and the entire breadth of supporting jurisprudence consequentially left by the wayside to which me must now unavoidably turn in the disposal of these appeals.

38. Sections 23 and 94 of the Trusts Act accordingly merit a visitation at this juncture-

"23. Liability for breach of trust- Where the trustee commits a breach of trust, he is liable to make good the loss which the trust-property or the beneficiary has thereby sustained, unless the beneficiary has by fraud induced the trustee to commit the breach, or the beneficiary, being competent to contract, has himself, without coercion or undue influence having been brought to bear on him, concurred in the breach, or subsequently acquiesced therein, with full knowledge of the facts of the case and of his right as against the trustee.

A trustee committing a breach of trust is not liable to pay interest except in the following cases:-

(a) where he has actually received interest:

(b) where the breach consists in unreasonable delay in paying trust-money to the beneficiary:

(c) where the trustee ought to have received interest, but has not done so:

(d) where he may be fairly presumed to have received interest.

He is liable, in case (a), to account for the interest actually received, and, in cases (b), (c) and (d), to account for simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum, unless Court otherwise directs.

(e) where the breach consists in failure to invest trust-money and to accumulate the interest or dividends thereon, he is liable to account for compound interest (with half-yearly rests) at the same rate.

(f) where the breach consists in the employment of trust-property or the proceeds thereof in trade or business, he is liable to account, at the option of the beneficiary, either for compound interest (with half-yearly rests) at the same rate, or for the net profits made by such employment.

Illustrations

(a) A trustee improperly leaves trust-property outstanding, and it is consequently lost: he is liable to make good the property lost, but he is not liable to pay interest thereon.

(b) A bequeaths a house to B in trust to sell it and pay the proceeds to C. B neglects to sell the house for a great length of time, whereby the house is deteriorated and its market price falls. B is answerable to C for the loss.

(c) A trustee is guilty of unreasonable delay in investing trust-money in accordance with section 20, or in paying it to the beneficiary. The trustee is liable to pay interest thereon for the period of the delay.

(d) The duty of the trustee is to invest trust-money in any of the securities mentioned in section 20, clause (a), (b), (c) or (d). Instead of so doing he retains the money in his hands. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to be charged either with the amount of the principal money and interest, or with the amount of such securities as he might have purchased with the trust-money when the investment should have been made, and the intermediate dividends and interest thereon.

(e) The instrument of trust directs the trustee to invest trust-money either in any such securities or on mortgage of immoveable property. The trustee does neither. He is liable for the principal money and interest.

(f) The instrument of trust directs the trustee to invest trust-money in any of such securities and to accumulate the dividends thereon. the trustee disregards the direction. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to be charged either with the amount of the principal money and compound interest, or with the amount of such securities as he might have purchased with the trust-money when the investment should have been made, together with the amount of the accumulation which would have arisen from a proper investment of the intermediate dividends.

(g) Trust-property is invested in one of the securities mentioned in section 20, clause (a), (b), (c) or (d). The trustee sells such security for some purpose not authorised by the terms of the instrument of trust. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, either to replace the security with the intermediate dividends and interest thereon, or to account for the proceeds of the sale with interest thereon.

(h) The trust-property consists of land. The trustee sells the land to a purchaser for a consideration without notice of the trust. The trustee is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to purchase other land of equal value to be settled upon the like trust, or to be charged with the proceeds of the sale with interest.";

"94. Constructive trusts in cases not expressly provided for- In any case not coming within the scope of any of the preceding sections, where there is no trust, but the person having possession of property has not the whole beneficial interest therein, he must hold the property for the benefit of the persons having such interest, or the residue thereof (as the case may be), to the extent necessary to satisfy their just demands.

Illustrations

(a) A, an executor, distributes the assets of his testator B to the legatees without having paid the whole of B's debts. The legatees hold for the benefit of B's creditors, to the extent necessary to satisfy their just demands, the assets so distributed.

(b) A by mistake assumes the character of a trustee for B, and under colour of the trust receives certain money. B may compel him to account for such moneys.

(c) A makes a gift of a lac of Taka to B, reserving to himself, with B's assent, power to revoke at pleasure the gift as to Tk. 10,000. The gift is void as to Tk. 10,000, and B holds that sum for the benefit of A."

39. It would be apt too to introduce at this juncture the essential components of the 1993 Trust Deed setting up the 'Zia Orphanage Trust'.

Summary of the relevant contents of the Trust Deed

40. Settlor and Trustees:

The settler of this trust is Tarique Rahman. The trustees appointed under the deed are Tarique Rahman, Mr. Arafat Rahman, and Mr. Mominur Rahman.

41. Beneficiaries:

The beneficiaries encompass two primary groups:

All direct descendants, both male and female, of the children of the settler and his brother.

All orphans residing in Bangladesh who have lost one or both parents or fulfills other prescribed criteria.

42. Trust Objectives:

The central objective of the trust is to provide aid and support to Muslim orphans throughout Bangladesh. Specifically, the trust aims to utilize all generated income towards the fulfillment of its objectives. The trustees are empowered to acquire, lease, construct, and manage both movable and immovable properties. This includes the authority to transfer, sell, lease, or rent any part of the trust's holdings as deemed appropriate by the Board of Trustees.

43. Financial Operations:

The trust is authorized to raise funds through diverse means, including accepting gifts, donations, grants, loans, and other forms of financial aid. This can be from governmental, private, or other sources, both within Bangladesh and internationally. The acceptance of foreign loans or donations is contingent upon approval from the relevant Bangladeshi government authorities. The Board of Trustees is responsible for investing the trust's assets to maximize profitability while adhering to the laws of Bangladesh. The deed specifically permits investment through various instruments, including Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDRs).

44. Initial Property:

The initial property allocated to the trust comprises a sum of 100,000 Taka (One lac).

45. Upon an examination of the relevant provisions of the Trusts Act, 1882, it is clear that the said Act provides a remedy for the act of criminal breach of trust. Section 23 stipulates that a trustee committing a criminal breach of trust is liable to make good the loss sustained by the trust property or the beneficiary as a result. A plain reading of this section indicates that the law regards criminal breach of trust primarily as a civil wrong capable of redress through an appropriate remedy awarded to the party who has suffered loss. The statutory framework under the Trusts Act does not encompass criminal sanctions for such breaches, instead it directs the court to determine the appropriate civil remedy based on the loss caused.

46. Predicated on the above, for conduct amounting to a criminal breach of trust, which is inherently a civil matter, to attract criminal liability, additional elements must be present. As the Supreme Court of India held in Delhi Race Club (1940) Ltd and Ors vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr, reported in 2024 INSC 626; AIR 2024 SC; 4531 that-

"Every act of criminal breach of trust may not result in a penal offence of criminal breach of trust unless there is evidence of manipulating act of fraudulent misappropriation. An act of criminal breach of trust involves a civil wrong in respect of which the person may seek his remedy for damages in civil courts but, any criminal breach of trust with a mens rea, gives rise to criminal prosecution as well."

47. This essential mental element, the mens rea, distinguishes a civil breach from the offence of criminal breach of trust under the Penal Code. Indeed, the relevant provision of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2004 also requires proof of such a culpable mental state.

48. Criminal breach of trust, as defined under section 405 of the Penal Code, involves the dishonest misappropriation or conversion of property entrusted to the accused for their own use. The provision explicitly requires 'dishonest intention' (mens rea) as a prerequisite for establishing the offence. Therefore, the prosecution must prove both the physical act of misappropriation or conversion (the actus reus) and the necessary dishonest state of mind (mens rea) accompanying that act. As held by the Supreme Court of India in Mitesh Kumar J. Sha vs. The State of Karnataka and others, reported in 2021 INSC 675; AIR 2021 SC 5298 that where the essential ingredients for the criminal offence are not made out, there can be no sustainable case of criminal breach of trust. Similarly, the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh ruled in Md. Ayubur Rahman vs. State reported in 56 DLR (2004) 281 that it constitutes an abuse of the court's process to continue criminal proceedings when the prima facie ingredients of the offences, including criminal breach of trust, cannot be established. In the present case, it is this Court's finding, accordingly, that the facts alleged do not demonstrate that the property in question was misappropriated. Consequently, as the act of misappropriation itself has not been established, the requisite dishonest intention cannot logically and readily be inferred. Significantly further, on reviewing the terms and conditions of the trust deed, the Court does not identify any clear breach of its provisions. Nevertheless, even assuming for the sake of argument that a criminal breach of trust did occur, the proper course of action would be to pursue a civil remedy. The essential element of mens rea required to found a criminal charge is wholly absent on the facts presented. Furthermore, the necessary concurrence of mens rea and actus reus cannot be established principally because the factual account fails to demonstrate that any act of misappropriation took place.

49. The spectre of malicious prosecution has loomed large in this case from its inception onwards and it is to that disquieting element of the manner of prosecution of this case to which this Court must unavoidably now turn. At the very inception of these cases, consecutively two Investigating Officers (I.O.s) named Mr. Nur Mohammad and Mr. Harunur Rashid investigated the case. The  I.O. Mr. Nur Mohammad filed charge sheet on 11.6.2008 chargesheeting five accused persons among whom Begum Khaleda Zia did not figure. The said I.O. particularly mentioned at the end of his Report that-

"                                 "

50. The  I.O. Mr. Harunur Rashid submitted charge sheet copying the Report of the  L.O. in toto only adding a paragraph at the end of the report where he implicated Begum Khaleda Zia. It is noted that Harunur Rashid was discharged from his job in 2005 during the BNP-regime due to his illegal appointment at the Bureau of Anti-Corruption. He resumed his position in 2008 at the ACC (the successor entity to the Bureau as established through the Anti-Corruption Commission Act of 2004) and took the charge of the investigation of the present case immediately at the heels of such joining. This provides the essential context of the investigation at this stage being tainted with malice reflected in the added paragraph implicating Begum Khaleda Zia.

51. Moreover, the  I.O. submitted charge sheet under sections 406/109 of the Penal Code on 11.6.2008. The  I.O. filed another charge sheet under sections 409/109 of the Penal Code on 25.6.2008. Section 406 as deals with the offence of criminal breach of trust simpliciter notably, however, is not included in the schedule to the Anti-Corruption Commission Act. To bring the case, therefore, under the purview of the said Act, the  I.O. inserted section 409 of the Code. This, it is argued on behalf of the Appellants was a deliberate and calculated act born out of malicious intention to bring the alleged acts of Begum Khaleda Zia and other Appellants under the scanner by way of an afterthought given section 409's operational ambit covering criminal breaches of trust by public servants, banks, merchants, or agents.

52. It has been contended by the prosecution that Begum Khaleda Zia was liable as she was the Prime Minister and her Principal Secretary, Dr. Kamal Uddin Siddiqui appended his signature in the bank account opening form as well as cheques with the direction of the Prime Minister. This issue, however, has not been proved in the case. It has not escaped this Court's attention that the present case was filed while Begum Khaleda Zia was not in power. That provided the prosecution ample opportunity of bringing out the concerned note sheet (if any) with regard to the authorization of opening of bank account. That opportunity has been squandered seemingly by the prosecution and, therefore, Begum Khaleda Zia has been implicated without placing a single signature over any piece of document.

53. The apprehension that has resultantly been generated in the mind of this Court is that the prosecution filed the case without any cogent ground but with a specific design conceived and executed in the manner and form of the second investigation just to implicate a former Prime Minister. This fact does, in this Court's view, inescapably introduce the element of malice and unsavoury intention into this case.

54. Having, therefore, to contend with the omnipresence of malicious prosecution in this present instance, this Court is constrained to visit the foundations of law and the core constitutional guarantees as militate against the spectre of such ill-schemed mode of prosecution from being initiated and continued to highly unsalutary consequences.

55. Every individual, as per the entrenched protective provision of Article 31 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, the inalienable right not only to be protected by the law but also to be treated in accordance with the law. The ambit of the protection so guaranteed shields against and action that in any way could be detrimental to a person's life, liberty, body, reputation, or property except when done in accordance with law. In other words, any action that otherwise detrimentally impinges upon these fundamental aspects of human existence and civic life must comply strictly with the dictates and mandates of the law properly understood and applied. It follows, therefore, that the constitutional space within which one is permitted to proceed against anyone is severely limited or restricted under Article 31 of the Constitution. The constitutional message, accordingly, to anyone about to embark on initiating prosecutory action against anyone is "tread with utmost discretion and caution" lest such action risks being singed by the firewall protection accorded under the Constitution to a supposed accused. Concomitantly, therefore, the right to sue anyone is hedged with or qualified strictly by the condition not to abuse that right by proceeding maliciously or without reasonable and probable cause. It is imperative that one must act to so prosecute with an honest intention to protect one's own or the public interest, or if the circumstances are such as to render it prima facie probable that the law is on one's side, regardless of one's motives. The bare fundamentals of the act of prosecution as laid out in Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 22 (2nd Ed. by Hailsham) at page 3 expressly, and aptly, highlight the component of "good reason" as essential to trigger off feasibly any prosecution exercise thus:

"A prosecution exists where a criminal charge is made before a judicial officer or tribunal and any person who makes or is actively instrumental in the making or prosecuting of such a charge is deemed to prosecute it, and is called the prosecutor. Thus a person who lays before a Magistrate an information stating that he suspects and has good reasons to suspect another, or who prefers a bill of indictment, is engaged in a prosecution; and he may be responsible for the prosecution, even though the charge made before the Magistrate is an oral.'

56. Professor Winfield on Torts, Sixth Edition, in Chapter 24, page 47, has this to say about the law of malicious prosecution:

"It had to make its way between two competing principles, the freedom of action that every man should have in bringing criminals to justice and the necessity for checking lying accusations of innocent people. For some time the Judges oscillated between apprehension of scaring off a just accuser and fear of encouraging a false one."

57. This Court opines, accordingly, in full subscription of the view above that the profundity of the judicial responsibility of discharging the duty of judicial scrutiny as so clearly highlighted by Winfield above ought not to be lost on anyone least of all the courts.

58. In realm of malicious prosecution there are two essential elements, namely, that no probable cause existed for instituting the prosecution or suit complained of, and that such prosecution or suit terminated in some way favorably to the defendant therein. In Black's Law Dictionary, malicious prosecution is stated to be:

"A judicial proceeding instituted against a person out of the prosecutor's malice and ill-will, with the intention of injuring him, without probable cause to sustain it, the process and proceedings being regular and formal, but not justified by the facts. For this injury an action on the case lies, called action of malicious prosecution."

59. Again, the missive here is for the courts to be ever vigilant against ill-intended proceedings not supported by law by lifting the veil of ostensible yet highly deceptive trappings of regularity.

60. The Law of Torts by Salmond, 14th Ed., (1965) at page 588, it has been stated as follows:

"In order that an action shall lie for malicious prosecution or the other forms of abusive process which have been referred to, the following conditions must be fulfilled:

(1) The proceedings must have been instituted or continued by the defendant.

(2) He must have acted without reasonable and probable cause.

(3) He must have acted maliciously.

(4) In certain classes of cases the proceedings must have been unsuccessful that is to say, must have terminated in favour of the plaintiff now suing.

"

61. Martin L. Newell, A Treatise on the Law of Malicious Prosecution, False Imprisonment, and the Abuse of Legal Process, 1892, page 6 outlines thus the crucial elements of and redress against malicious prosecution:

"A judicial proceeding, instituted by one person against another from wrongful or improper motives, and without probable cause to sustain it. It is usually called a malicious prosecution; and an action for damages for being subjected to such a suit is called an action for malicious prosecution."

62. It must be borne in mind that malice in the broader legal context is not only restricted to anger, hatred and revenge, but extends to encompass any other unlawful and unjustifiable motive. It may, therefore, be said that any motive, other than that of instituting criminal proceedings supported by a legally and reasonably substantiated prosecution case, is a malicious motive on the part of a person who acts under the influence of it. In the case of Province of East Bengal and Others vs. S.M. Faruque and Others reported in PLD 1959 268; LEX/HEPK/0035/1958, it was held that "reasonable and probable cause" means a genuine belief based on reasonable grounds that the proceedings are justified. In the case of Herniman vs. Smith 1938 AC 305 (316), Lord Atkin said that no better statement of what is reasonable and probable cause is to be found than in the following observation of Hawkins, J., in Hicks vs. Faulkner (1878) 8 Q BD 167:

I should define reasonable and probable cause to be an honest belief in the guilt of the accused based upon a full conviction, founded upon reasonable grounds, of the existence of a state of circumstances, which, assuming them to be true, would reasonably lead any ordinarily prudent and cautious man, placed in the position of the accused to the conclusion that the person charged was probably guilty of the crime imputed.

63. Similarly, Salmond on the Law of Torts, 9th Edition, pages 658-659, elaborates on a plaintiff's duty to take care thus:

"Having regard, however, to the facts known to the defendant, he must show a reasonably sound judgment and use reasonable care in determining whether there are sufficient grounds for the proceedings instituted by him, and any failure to exhibit such judgment or care will be imputed to him as a want of reasonable and probable cause."

64. In Mitchell vs. Jenkins, 5 B. & Ad. 594, by Parke, J.:

"The term malice.... is not to be considered in the sense of spite or hatred against an individual, but of malus animus, and as denoting that the party is actuated by improper and indirect motives."

65. In the case of Naber Shaha vs. Hamsuddin and ors. reported in 15 DLR (1963) 217; LEX/HEPK/0141/1962, it was observed:

"In a suit for malicious prosecution, rather to sustain an action for malicious prosecution the following essentials must to co-exist:-

(1) A prosecution of the plaintiff by the defendant.

(2) There must be a want of reasonable and probable cause for that prosecution.

(3) The defendant must have acted maliciously (i.e, with an improper motive and not to further the ends of justice.)

(4) The prosecution must have ended in favour of the person proceeded against.

(5) It must have caused damage to the party proceeded against.

66. The High Court of West Pakistan in the case of Abdur Rashid vs. The State Bank of Pakistan and Another reported in PLD 1970 344; LEX/HWPK/0209/1969 aptly expounded, in detail, the constitutive elements of malicious prosecution upon considering the development in the legal system USA, UK, Australia, India and Pakistan and merits reproduction in extenso:

"The term 'malice', in a prosecution of the nature which is before me, has been held not to be spite or hatred against an individual but of 'malus animus' and as denoting the working of improper and indirect motives. The proper motive for a prosecution is the desire to secure the ends of justice. It should, therefore, be shown that the prosecutor was not actuated by this desire but by his personal feelings--See Mitchell v. Jenkins (1833) 5 B & Ad. 588; Pike v. Waldrum (1952) 1 Lloyd's Rep. 431 and Stevens v. Midland Counties Ry. (1854) 10 Ex. 352. Further, malice should be proved by the plaintiff affirmatively: --Abrath v. N.E. Ry. (1886) 11 A C 247. Malice may sometime be inferred from absence of reasonable and probable cause, but this rule has no general application and there may be cases where it would be appropriate not to infer malice from unreasonableness. Further, if reasonable and probable cause is proved, the question of malice becomes irrelevant, and also defect of want of reasonable and probable cause cannot be supplied by evidence of malice--See Turner v. Ambler (1847) 10   252; Mitchell v. Jenkins; Brown v. Hawkes (1891) 2  B 718 and Herniman v. Smith (1938) A C 305. It would be proper here to quote the following observation of Denning, L.J. (as he then was) in Tempest v. Snowden (1952) 1 KB 130:

Even though a prosecutor is actuated by the most express malice, nevertheless he is not liable so long as there was reasonable and probable cause for the prosecution. The same rule has been applied by the Courts in India and Pakistan. Several decisions on this point were brought to my notice by Mr. Fazeel. The first case on this point is the decision of the High Court, Lahore, in Abdul Shakoor v. Upton & Co. A I R 1924 Lah. 1 where it was held that in suits for malicious prosecution, proof of the existence of malice itself is not sufficient but should be accompanied by proof of absence of reasonable and probable cause. The Lahore High Court reiterated this view in Nur Khan v. Jiwandas A IR 1927 Lah. 120 and Gobind Ram v. Kaju Ram AIR 1939 Lah. 504. The same view prevailed with the High Court of Madras in V.T. Srinivasa Thathachariar v. P. Thiruvenkatachariar AIR 1932 Mad. 601. This view also found approval of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Balbhaddar Singh v. Badri Sah A IR 1926 PC 46 and in Raja Braja Sunder Deb and others v. Bamdeb Das and others A IR 1944 PC1 in which last case it was further observed that malice cannot be inferred from the anger of the prosecutor.

As regards reasonable and probable cause, the classic definition is that given by Hawkins, J. in Hicks v. Faulkner (1881) 8 QBD 167 that it is, "an honest belief in the guilt of the accused based upon a full conviction, founded upon reasonable grounds, of the existence of a state of circumstances, which, assuming them to be true, would reasonably lead any ordinarily prudent and cautious man placed in the position of the accuser, to the conclusion that the person charged was probably guilty of the crime imputed." This definition was approved by Lord Atkin in his speech in Herniman v. Smith. But in a later decision of the House of Lords, Glinski v. McIver (1962) A C 726 Lord Devlin defined reasonable and probable cause to mean that there must be a cause (i.e. sufficient grounds) for thinking that the plaintiff was probably guilty of the crime imputed. Diplock, L.J. followed this definition in Dallison v. Caffery (1965) 1 Q B 348. It is not necessary that the prosecutor should have the belief that evidence is sufficient to secure the conviction. The requirement of law would be satisfied if the prosecutor has prima facie evidence pointing out towards the plaintiff's guilt Dawson v. Vasandau (1863) 11 WR 516. In an Australian case Commonwealth Life Assurance Society Ltd. v. Brain (1935) 53 CLR 343 Dixon, J. observed that it is enough that the prosecutor believes that the probability of the accused's guilt is such that upon general grounds of justice a charge against him should be brought. It is not necessary that the prosecutor should enter into an examination of the strength of the evidence for the defence. He is concerned only with the question whether there is a fit case to be tried--See Tempest v. Snowden; Glinski v. Mclver; Dallison v. Caffery. The rule may be summed up, according to Lord Devlin, Glinski v. McIver in this way: "Did the Prosecutor actually believe and did he reasonably believe that he had cause for prosecution?"

67. Unsurprisingly, courts have been duly vigilant in guarding against malicious prosecution by clearly identifying and addressing the unsalutary effects of such a phenomenon. It is appreciated that on account of malicious prosecution, there is invariably the incurrence of stigma, mental anguish, severe dislocation caused to one's way of life, and irreparable damage caused to one's self-worth and sense of dignity to which the law is not and the courts should not be impervious to. In the case of Ghulam Nabi Khan vs. Azad Government of State of Jammu & Kashmir reported in 1984 CLC 325, it was held accordingly that-

"Where a person of good reputation for his honesty, integrity and efficiency suffered malicious criminal prosecution that not only caused him mental and physical torture but also proved a big jolt to his reputation, then such person was justified in feeling aggrieved of injury caused to his good reputation and damages were awarded to him for such defamation."

68. In positioning itself within the legal standards required to establish a case for malicious prosecution, this Court finds itself swayed by the following observations recorded in Balbhaddar Singh and another vs. Badri Shah and another AIR 1926 PC 46 which were followed in Naber Shaha vs. Hamsuddin and ors. 15 DLR (1963) 217; LEX/HEPK/0141/1962, that with great lucidity expounds upon the burden of proof required to be discharged by a victim of such prosecution:

"In actions for malicious prosecution the burden of proof is upon the plaintiff to show that the prosecution of which he complains was instituted with malice and without probable cause. In an action for malicious prosecution the plaintiff has to prove that he was prosecuted by the defendant, that the proceedings complained of terminated in favour of the plaintiff if from their nature they were capable of so terminating, that the prosecution was instituted against him without any reasonable and probable cause and that it was due to a malicious intention of the defendant, and not with a mere intention of carrying the law into effect. The question is not: "Did the plaintiff commit the offence" or did defendant invent the offence against plaintiff; the two queries exhausting the possibilities of the situation. The question is: Has plaintiff proved that defendant invented and instigated the whole proceedings for prosecution."

69. The significance attached on the global plane on measures of deterrence of malicious prosecution merits its due consideration in weight at this juncture. The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 (ICCPR) denotes the obligation of State in cases of miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful conviction. Article 14 (6) of the ICCPR states:

"When a person has by a final decision been convicted of a criminal offence and when subsequently his conviction has been reversed or he has been pardoned on the ground that a new or newly discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a result of such conviction shall be compensated according to law, unless it is proved that the non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time is wholly or partly attributable to him."

70. In Babloo Chauhan @ Dabloo vs. State Government of NCT of Delhi reported in 247 (2018) DLT 31, the High Court of Delhi, while dealing with an appeal on the issues of fine and awarding of default sentences without reasoning, and suspension of sentence during pendency of appeal, expressed its concerns about wrongful implication of innocent persons who are acquitted but after long years of incarceration, and the lack of a legislative framework to provide relief to those who are wrongfully prosecuted. The Court, vide its order dated 30.11.2017, called for the Law Commission of India to undertake a comprehensive examination of the issue highlighted in para 11 to 16 of the said order and make its recommendation thereon to the Government of India.

71. Pursuant to the aforesaid order of the High Court of Delhi the Law Commission of India defines wrongful prosecution as the case of miscarriage of justice where procedural misconducts- police or prosecutorial, malicious or negligent- resulted in wrongful prosecution of an innocent person, who was ultimately acquitted, with making an observation or recording a finding to that effect. The underlying sentiment being that such person should not have been subjected to these proceedings in the first place. Furthermore, the said Commission clarified the ambit of 'wrongful prosecution' would include (i) malicious prosecution; and (ii) prosecutions instituted without good faith.

72. The Commission headed by Dr. Justice BS Chauhan, in its report, recommended for the enactment of specific legal provision, along with drafting the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2018 containing the definition of malicious prosecution and detailing the procedure for seeking compensation, for redressal of cases of miscarriage of justice resulting in wrongful prosecution covering both the substantive and procedural aspects; i.e., a statutory and legal framework establishing the mechanism for adjudicating upon the claims of wrongful prosecution, and inter alia, award payment of compensation by the State, if so determined. Furthermore, the Commission recommended setting up a 'Special Court' in each district for adjudicating upon the claims of compensation for wrongful prosecution.

73. The United Kingdom, in conformity with its international obligations under the ICCPR, has already incorporated the provision of Article 14(6) into its domestic legislation, i.e., of ss. 133, 133A, and 133B the Criminal Justice Act, 1988 under Part XI subtitled 'Miscarriage of Justice'. In Berry vs. British Transport Commission reported in [1961] 1 QB 149, Diplock J. observed at page 159 that the action on the case for malicious prosecution could be founded upon any form of legal proceedings, civil or criminal, brought maliciously and without any reasonable or proper cause by the plaintiff against the defendant, but, as the action was in case, damage was an essential ingredient.

74. In the USA, claims against malicious prosecution known as  1983 claims', fall under Title 42 providing that every person who, under colour of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or Territory or the District of Columbia, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by the Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress. Moreover, as per the United States Code Title 28  1495, the United States Court of Federal Claims shall have jurisdiction to render judgment upon any claim for damages by any person unjustly convicted of an offense against the United States and imprisoned. Apart from Federal Law, all the States in the US have their own respective laws providing for compensation monetary and/or non-monetary assistance to the victims of wrongful incarceration.

75. In cases of miscarriages of justice resulting in wrongful convictions, the Constitution of Germany [Grundgesetz (GG)], 1949, also referred to as the Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany, assigns under Article 34 the liability for violation of official duty and provides compensation to the wrongfully convicted. Moreover, the 'Law on Compensation for Law Enforcement Measures' (Strafverfolgungsentschdigungsgesetz) (StrEG) in force since 1971 is equipped with the provisions for providing compensation by the State.

76. On the issue of government machinery and executive and regulatory forces aligning to engineer, albeit through a slipshod process, a persecutory prosecution on questionable and trumped-up charges, this Court has painstakingly perused the revelatory information divulged by and crucial indicators of such a probability various prosecution witnesses upon cross-examination. It is a wonder that the structural weaknesses in the prosecution's case represented by such information were not picked up at any stage in the case proceedings from trial up to the High Court Division to flay the prosecution's case one layer at a time.

77. Such state of affair merits, therefore, parading below some stark revelations coming across on cross-examination of several key prosecution witnesses as cumulatively discredit and demolish the maliciously pursued prosecution on the key charge of criminal breach of trust.

78. Relevant Cross-examinations



PW 1 Harunur Rashid

In the cross-examination of Md. Harunur Rashid (Deputy Director, ACC) by the Counsel of Begum Khaleda Zia, Mr. Rashid stated that the Sonali Bank Ltd Ramna Corporate Branch Account Number 5416 form did not bear Begum Khaleda Zia's signature. He further asserted that there was no mention that the account was opened by her or that it was to be operated by her.

In the cross-examination for Mr. Tarique Rahman, Mr. Rashid opined that although Mr. Rahman had claimed that the impugned US dollars were sent by Kuwait Emir to help constituting the Zia Welfare Trust. Mr. Rashid did not communicate with the Kuwait embassy or the Foreign Ministry in order to ascertain truth of this claim. As per his statements, he in fact assumed that the claim was untrue. Mr. Rashid stated in his cross (for Begum Zia) that Begum Zia did not herself constitute the Trust but made someone else constitute the same. However, he further asserted that there was no mention of any orders or directions on part of Begum Zia in terms of facilitating any inter-bank transactions between Sonali Bank Ltd. Ramna Corporate Branch and Prime Bank Ltd. in relation to the Trust fund.

Mr. Harunur Rashid further maintained in his cross that he never received any complaints from any organization, authority, or individuals regarding any irregularities or anomalous activities at the Trust constituted by dint of the Deed of Trust. Only an unnamed source was mentioned by him incidentally.



PW 2 S.M. Gaffarul Alam, S.I. CID, Dhaka

In his cross-examination, PW2 S.M. Gaffarul Alam, the Sub-Inspector responsible for filing the FIR in this matter, stated that the FIR was not accompanied by a forwarding letter from the ACC. This statement was made while under cross-examination by the Counsel for Begum Khaleda Zia. Further, when cross-examined by Counsel for Tarique Rahman, Mr. Alam conceded that the FIR did not specify a time of occurrence. Instead, the FIR referenced a period of approximately fifteen years, spanning from 28.11.1993 to 28.3.2007. He also stated that the FIR specified no reasons for the considerable delay (or arguably inordinate) in filing the case.

PW 8 Afzal Hossain

In the cross-examination for Tarique Rahman, PW 8 Afzal Hossain, Senior Vice President, Prime Bank Ltd., stated that none of the papers that were seized bore any signatures from Mr. Tarique Rahman.

PW 9 Mazed Ali

In the cross-examination for Begum Khaleda Zia, Mr. Mazed Ali, Accounts Officer, Prime Minister's Office, asserted that during the course of his employment at the Prime Minister's Office, he never saw any files for the Prime Minister Orphanage Fund. He further stated that there, in fact, is a fund named the Prime Minister Orphanage Fund (without substantiating why there were no files). He went on to say that although the files in relation to Prime Minister's Relief Fund and Prime Minister Welfare Fund had Begum Zia's signatures, however, no files in relation to Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund bore her signatures. Moreover, he mentioned that every year between 1991 to 2007, both internal and external audits happened, but no objections were raised in such audits against activities of the Orphanage Fund.

PW 10 Mr. Alfa Sani

In his cross-examination by Counsel for Begum Zia, Mr. Alfa Sani, Administrative Officer, Prime Minister's Office, mentioned that during his employment at the Prime Minister's Office, he never handled any files regarding the said Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund. He further asserted that while there were separate files and dossiers on Prime Minister's Relief Fund and Prime Minister's Welfare Fund, he did not know if there were any files, dossiers, or registers on the Orphanage Fund at the Prime Minister's Office.

PW 11 Mokhlesur Rahman (Administrative Officer)

Mr. Mokhlesur Rahman, Administrative Officer, Prime Minister's Office, in his cross-examination by the Counsel for Begum Zia asserted that he had no knowledge about any accounts, transactions, or files related to any Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund. He further mentioned that Mr. Mazed Ali presented the files and dossiers when requested by Mr. Harunur Rashid. However, Mr. Mokhlesur had no knowledge from where the files were so brought by Mr. Mazed Ali.

PW 12 Monjur Hossain (AGM, Sonali Bank, Ramna Branch)

In his cross-examination for Begum Khaleda Zia, Monjur Hossain said that the papers as seized by Mr. Harunur Rashid, including the Accounts Opening Form and Signature Card with respect to the Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund (against the Account 5416) bore no signatures of Begum Zia. He further noted that there was no permission letter or memorandum (smarokpotro) letter issued by the Prime Minister's Office along with the Accounts Opening Form either. Other than the transaction details as seized, Monjur Hossain claimed to have no knowledge about any other transaction made by and through the said Orphanage Fund. During the course of his service, Mr. Hossain said, that no communications regarding the deposit, status, transaction, remittance or audit objection with respect to the said Orphanage Fund were made by the Prime Minister's Office through any office letter or memorandum.

PW 13 Mohiduddin Ahmed (Senior Principal Officer, Sonali Bank Ltd)

In the cross-examination, Mohiuddin Ahmed noted that the seized documents did not bear any signatures of Begum Khaled Zia.

PW 14 Syed Jaglul Pasha, Manager (Joint Secretary), Privatization Commission

In his cross-examination by the Counsel for Begum Zia, Syed Jaglul Pasha claimed that the Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund had a separate ledger but noted that he had not provided the said ledger to the ACC. Similarly, he claimed that he had seen the cheques of the Orphanage Fund but that he had not provided the same to the ACC either.

PW 20 Towhidur Rahman Khan, Manager (Joint Secretary), Biniyog Board

In his cross-examination, Mr. Khan noted that the original files with regard to the Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund had been missing and that during his service, the said files had never been found.

PW 21 Abdul Barek Bhuiyan (Account Officer, Prime Minister's Office)

In the cross-examination for the accused Begum Khaleda Zia, Mr. Bhuiyan noted that while in service, he had never seen original files of the said Prime Minister's Orphanage Fund.

PW 25 Molla Farid Ahmed (Vice President Prime Bank Ltd)

In his cross-examination, Mr. Farid Ahmed noted that in the relevant papers (Exhibits VI, VIII, IX), there were no signatures or initials of Mr. Tarique Rahman.

PW 26 Khandokar Abdus Sattar (Retired Ambassador, Retired Director General, Foreign Ministry, Bangladesh Government)

In his cross-examination by the Counsel for Begum Zia and Tarique Rahman, Mr. Sattar said that he had no knowledge if/whether the said money's source was Kuwaiti Emir.

PW 27 Md. Jahangir Alam (Deputy Officer Land, Nandigram, Bogra)

In the cross-examination, Mr. Alam revealed several irregularities in investigation. He stated that in their report, there was no mention of any locals who they asked about the Trust Property.

PW 31 Harunur Rashid (Deputy Director, ACC)

In the cross-examination for the accused Begum Khaleda Zia, Mr. Rashid asserted that he had not sent any letters to the Foreign Ministry or Kuwait Embassy to ascertain if the source of the money was the Kuwait Ameer. He noted that he knew (i.e., assumed) that the said money had not come from Kuwait Ameer. He further revealed that no internal or external auditors in relation to any internal or external audits of the Prime Minister's Office were made a witness in this case. He noted further that per the Investigation Report, as submitted by Mr. Nur Ahmed (PW 32), Trust was registered as a Private Trust and that the members of the Trust were not to be treated as public servants. He also noted that there was no proof of any approval from Begum Zia regarding the opening of the FDRs.

PW 32 Nur Ahmed, Director General, ACC

During the cross-examination, Nur Ahmed admitted that he had not documented the details of his daily inquiries in the prescribed form or register, as stipulated by Schedule 7 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Rules 2007 and required under Rule 7(7) of the same. He further acknowledged that Begum Khaleda Zia's name was not on the list of accused individuals recorded in his report and in the description of the accusations documented therein. In his cross-examination, Mr. Ahmed further stated that his investigation report noted the absence of any available documents or files pertaining to the management of the Orphanage fund by the former Prime Minister's Office, thus precluding him to comment with certainty on Begum Zia's alleged involvement. He further asserted that he received no complaints over misappropriation related to the Zia Memorial Trust. He further affirmed that the Trust is a private entity (i.e., a Private Trust) and that the accused individuals were not public servants. Moreover, he stated that the case diary did not contain the filing date of the complaint or even the complainant's name.

79. These inherent flaws in the prosecution's case and indeed the highly motivated and persecutory nature of the case as revealed through the cross-examinations above took centre stage in Begum Zia's section 342 statement. In the course of providing the statement Begum Zia exposed the weaknesses of the case to their very core and which has proven to be very illuminating at this appellate stage in her case.

80. On 2.2.2017 Begum Zia, during her examination under section 342 of the CrPC categorically stated that she would not provide a statement at that time. She requested time to prepare and indicated she would later give a complete statement. After the examination for the day, Begum Zia asserted that despite officially expressing her lack of confidence in the court, she was compelled to undergo examination under section 342 on that day. She said she would obtain a certified copy of the examination and, after discussion with her lawyer, would make a formal statement.

81. On 19.10.2017, she began her statement under section 342, which continued with short adjournments until 5.12.2017. During this time, she detailed instances of political harassment she had experienced. She emphasized a statement made by the then Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina at a public meeting, alleging that Begum Zia had misappropriated funds from an orphanage trust. Begum Zia stated that the Prime Minister's comments about an ongoing case in a public sitting constituted interference, potentially influencing the court's processes and judicial independence. Further alluding to potential malicious prosecution, Begum Zia noted that corruption and extortion cases against the incumbent Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina were withdrawn and dismissed after the latter assumed power. Conversely, cases against Begum Zia had persisted and were being proceeded with unusual speed, if not alarming alacrity, with new cases also being filed. In her statement, Begum Zia also pointed out discrepancies in the prosecution's statements that were revealed during cross-examination. She concluded by denying all charges, asserting they were false, fabricated, and malicious, brought with aim only to harass her.

82. The question that arises at this juncture is whether in the alleged commission of a criminal breach of trust there was any entrustment of any property upon Begum Khaleda Zia and whether within the meaning of section 405 of the Penal Code she had dishonestly used or disposed of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such a trust was to be discharged. It is to be noted that there arises an assumption of a legal obligation from the very act of entrustment and there is a bar imposed under the law in section 405 in that such essentially fiduciary obligation is nullified when the entrustee acts dishonestly for wrongful gain or in a manner that causes wrongful loss to another.

83. Learned Advocate, Mr. Md. Ruhul Quddus in so constructing section 405 asserts that in the facts there was no entrustment as such of any property and no actual dominion over the same within the meaning of section 405. Nor in the facts is there present any element of a breach of any legal contract, implicit or explicit, given that one would be hard-pressed to locate such an assumption of a contractual obligation by Begum Khaleda Zia in the facts.

84. Evident from the High Court Division records is the fact that learned Advocate Mr. A.J. Mohammad Ali and Mr. Khandaker Mahbub Hossain drew the High Court Division's attention to yet another angle to section 405 as pertains to violation of any legal prescription contained in any law. It was their contention in the facts, and aptly so, that the law applicable here is the Trusts Act, 1882 and it is by reference to the provisions of that piece of legislation that the courts of law are bound to assess the liability, if any, of Begum Khaleda Zia under a section 405 scenario. Evidently, however, the High Court Division completely ignored that line of argument and did not at all engage in discussing at any length this focal and crucial issue raised by Begum Khaleda Zia's lawyers. It is now submitted that should the Trusts Act have been taken up for substantive consideration, the High Court Division would have readily been directed to the provisions of section 94 by the terms of which Begum Khaleda Zia assumed the role of a constructive trustee in the facts between 1991-1993. If at all, in the facts, the question of a liability for breach of trust as envisaged under section 23 of the Act could apply to the post-1993 scenario governed solely by the trust settlement deed to which Begum Khaleda Zia is not privy at all.

85. This Court deduces form the facts that the constructive trustee Begum Khaleda Zia discharged her responsibilities under the Trusts Act fully upon transfer of the funds over which she had dominion as custodian from 1991 onwards thereof and with which she had been entrusted until 1993. But that is where her role ended. In other words, Begum Khaleda Zia had no dominion over the corpus of the fund beyond her capacity as a constructive trustee i.e., 1991-1993 and at no time beyond that period can any actus reus be imputed to her with regard to the handling or dealings in such property in violation of the Trusts Act, 1882 or indeed within the meaning of section 409 of the Penal Code.

86. It has been contended on behalf of Begum Khaleda Zia in Criminal Appeal Nos. 64 and 63 of 2024 that the High Court Division committed an error of law in convicting the Appellant by holding that it was her obligation "to secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained" as no such requirement exists either under section 5(1) of the PCA, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code.

87. It is advantageous to examine section 5(1) of the PCA, 1947 or section 409 of the Penal Code. However, the offence mentioned in section 405 of the Penal Code is punishable under section 409 while the offences mentioned in section 5(1) of the PCA, 1947 is punishable under section 5(2). Section 405 lays down that-

"Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to do, commits "criminal breach of trust".

88. Section 5 of the PCA lays down the following-

5(1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal misconduct-

(a) if he accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain from any person for himself or for any other person, any gratification (other than legal remuneration) as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 161 of the Penal Code, or

(b) if he accepts or obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person any valuable thing without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate, from any person whom he knows to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any proceeding or business transacted or about to be transacted by him, or having any connection with the official functions of himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate, or from any person whom he knows to be interested in or related to the person so concerned, or

(c) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or otherwise converts for his own use any property entrusted to him or under his control as a public servant or allows any other person so to do, or

(d) if he, by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position as public servant, obtains or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage, or

(e) if he, or any of his dependents, is in possession, for which the public servant cannot reasonably account, of pecuniary resources or of property disproportionate to his known sources of income.

Explanation. In this clause "dependent" in relation to a public servant, means his wife, children and step-children, parents, sisters and minor brothers residing with and wholly dependent on him.

(2) Any public servant who commits or attempts to commit criminal misconduct shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both, and the pecuniary resources or property to which the criminal misconduct relates may also be confiscated to the State.

..."

89. From the above provisions of law, it is divulged that neither section 405 of the Penal Code nor section  of the PCA, 1947 contains the words "to secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained". However, the Golden Rule of interpretation gives the court latitude to modify the literal meaning of a law to avoid an absurd or unreasonable outcome. The said rule of interpretation essentially provides the court a way to deviate from the strict, literal meaning of words when that meaning would lead to an unjust or nonsensical result or an absurdity. Given that, if a person dishonestly misappropriates or uses the property over which he has dominion, he is punishable for the offence. It is, therefore, palpably clear that despite there are no words "to secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained" couched in section 405 of the Penal Code or section 5(1) of the PCA, 1947 it will suffice to hold a public servant guilty if it is proved that he dishonestly misappropriates or does not make proper use of the property over which he has dominion.

90. In the case in hand, indeed, the crux of the matter is that how far the prosecution proved the allegations under section 405 of the Penal Code or section 5(1) of the PCA, 1947. However, it is evinced from the record that the prosecution utterly failed to prove the allegations against Begum Khaleda Zia as stated above beyond reasonable doubt. In any case of the matter, the probe into the element of "securing due welfare and proper use of fund obtained" is a superfluous one given our findings hereinabove, that there was no outright entrustment of property to Begum Khaleda Zia to begin with. In the facts, accordingly, and from the evidence adduced there is no ground to hold that the High Court Division's deduction as to "secure due welfare and proper use of fund obtained" was in anyway well-founded.

91. It has further been contended on behalf of Begum Khaleda Zia that the enhancement of sentence can only be made in appeal preferred against the judgment passed by the trial court. Section 417A of the CrPC provides for the provisions for preferring appeal against the inadequacy of sentence. Section 439(5) of the CrPC lays down that where an appeal lies under the CrPC and no appeal is brought, no proceedings by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed. However, in the case in hand, no appeal was filed by the ACC against the inadequacy of sentence.

92. From a perusal of the judgment of the trial court it appears that the Special Judge convicted Begum Khaleda Zia under section 409 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947. It is settled position of law that a person aggrieved against the judgment and order of conviction passed by the Special Judge, is entitled to prefer appeal before the High Court Division under section 10(1) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958. However, there is no categorical provision in the Criminal Law Amendment Act as to whether the State or the ACC can file revision against the inadequacy of sentence passed by the Special Judge. In this regard, we may profitably extract section 10 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958.

"10. (1) An appeal from the judgment of a Special Judge shall lie to-

(a) the High Court Division, if the Special Judge is or has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or an Assistant Sessions Judge:

(1A) The Court to which an appeal lies under sub-section (1) shall also have powers of revisions.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, in any case tried by a Special Judge appointed by the Government under section 3, in which such Special Judge has passed an order of acquittal, the Commission may direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to such Court as aforesaid.

(Emphasis added by this Court)

93. Thus, an appeal under section 10(1) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act shall lie before the High Court Division against the judgment of the Special Judge while section 10(1A) invests the High Court Division with the power of revision. However, it has not been categorically provided in the Criminal Law Amendment Act whether either appeal or revision will lie against the inadequacy of sentence passed by the Special Judge. That said, it is the case, moreover, there is no express statutory bar to filing revision in the instance of inadequate sentencing passed by the Special Judge. Given such circumstance, the overwhelming consideration that the Criminal Law Amendment Act being a piece of special legislation governs necessarily sentencing under an equally special piece of legislation like the PCA. It necessarily follows, therefore, that under such circumstances the door is always open under section 10(1A) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act to file revision even in instances of inadequate sentences. Therefore, we must necessarily conclude that in the given circumstances, it may logically be deduced that revision will lie in the High Court Division under section 10(1A) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act. The above legal exposition finds support from the decision made by this Division in the case of Durnity Daman Commission vs. Rashedul Huq Chishti and Ors, reported in 18 ADC (2021) 636. This Court observed that-

"From the above discussion, this Division holds the view that a revision under section 10(14) of the Act of 1958 against an order of the Special Judge is quite maintainable and alternatively there opened a new avenue of preferring an appeal under section 22 of the Money Laundering Prevention Act of 2012."

Again, section 5 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1958 provides that-

"5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or in any other law, the offences specified in the Schedule shall be triable exclusively by a Special Judge."

94. It, thus, appears that the non obstante clause incorporated in section 5 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act excludes the application of general law, and as such the special law shall prevail over the provisions of CrPC. Admittedly, the offences punishable under section 409 of the Penal Code and section 5(2) of the PCA, 1947 are exclusively triable by the Special Judge. Having regard to the above, we are of the opinion that since there is no provision of preferring appeal against the inadequacy of sentence passed by the Special Judge, the revision will lie against the same before the High Court Division under section 10(1A) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act. Such finding as above, though not in consonance with the arguments pleaded by learned Counsel for Begum Khaleda Zia, does not operate in any way to detract from the centrality of our findings above that the High Court Division though rightly invested with the power of revision arrived at a grossly wrong conclusion taking the route of malicious prosecution. It is evident that in the case of Begum Khaleda Zia the High Court while exercising the revisional jurisdiction enhanced her sentence without taking into consideration the evidence on record, and hence the impugned judgment of the High Court Division is liable to be scrapped.

95. Our summary of core findings are, accordingly, enumerated hereinbelow:

I. The convictions under section 409 of the Penal Code, 1860 for alleged criminal breach of trust in the absence of the constitutive ingredients of such offence as defined under section 405 with illustrations are misconceived and have resulted in a travesty of justice.

II. To be an offence of Criminal Breach of Trust, there must be an entrustment/dominion over the property belonging to another and the same has to be dishonestly misappropriated as per section 405 of the Penal Code, 1860 but in the instant case, there was no element of entrustment upon the Appellant Begum Khaleda Zia.

III. The general principle of criminal jurisprudence is that the State has to prove allegation(s) against an accused beyond all reasonable doubts but both the courts below have violated the said principle and convicted the Appellants on an trumped-up charges without seeking the aid of the applicable law.

IV. Both the High Court Division and the Trial Court below passed their respective judgments on the basis of hypothetical presumptions and accusations not based on legal evidences.

V. The ACC has stepped beyond its jurisdiction to have initiated the instant criminal proceeding as the issue revolves around a private trust and there is no accusation/ complaint from the relevant party concerned.

VI. The very initiation of proceedings is barred by law and as such not only the judgments below but also the entire proceedings should, therefore, be set aside giving benefit to all individuals who have been maliciously prosecuted.

In conclusion, in these proceedings we have been alerted to the fact that how much more a court is than a courtroom. It is a process and a spirit structured and nurtured to prevent the violation of constitutional guarantees and the withholding of due process of law. In other words, courts are there to ensure that judicial proceedings are not reduced to being sacrificial rituals.

96. In the premises made above, we pass the following order:

All the appeals are, hereby, allowed by this Division's unanimous decision.

97. Accordingly, the impugned judgment and order dated 30.10.2018 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 1676 of 2018 with Criminal Appeal Nos. 2215, 2292 of 2018 and Criminal Revision No. 741 of 2018, and the judgment and order dated 8.2.2018 passed by the Special Judge, Special Judge Court No. 5, Dhaka in Special Case No. 17 of 2017 are, hereby, set aside.

98. Consequently, all the Appellants having not been found guilty of the charges leveled against them, stand fully acquitted.

99. The proceedings constituting the subject matter of these appeals are found to be a manifest contrived misapplication of the law as tantamount to malicious prosecution.

100. This judgment shall also extend to other convicted persons who, however, did not prefer any appeal.

101. This decision shall, resultantly restore the Appellants' and all other convicts' dignity, reaffirm their innocence, and thereby, put an end to the unwarranted proceedings initiated against them.

102. All Appellants on bail shall necessarily stand discharged from their respective bail bonds.

103. The office is directed to communicate the order forthwith to the High Court Division as well as the concerned authority for taking necessary action.

===End===

===20SCOBAD36===
<div style="font-family: Georgia, serif; line-height: 1.6; color: #333;">

  
  <div style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 30px;">
        <h3>APPELLATE DIVISION</h3>
    
    <p><strong>Present:</strong><br>
    Mr. Justice Obaidul Hassan, Chief Justice<br>
    Mr. Justice Borhanuddin<br>
    Mr. Justice M. Enayetur Rahim<br>
    Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam<br>
    Mr. Justice Md. Abu Zafor Siddique<br>
    Mr. Justice Jahangir Hossain</p>

    <p><strong>CIVIL APPEAL NO. 456 OF 2017</strong><br>
    (Arising out of C.P. No.895 of 2017)</p>
  </div>

  <div style="margin-bottom: 20px;">
    <p>Bangladesh Tailbahi Jahaj Malik Samity, represented by its President<br>
    ... Appellant</p>
    
    <p style="text-align: center;">-Versus-</p>
    
    <p>Chairman, Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) and others<br>
    ... Respondents</p>
  </div>

  <div style="margin-bottom: 30px;">
    <table style="width: 100%; border: none;">
      <tr>
        <td style="vertical-align: top; width: 20%;"><strong>For the Appellant</strong></td>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;">: Mr. Kamal-ul-Alam, Senior Advocate, Ms. Shahanaj Akhter, Advocate, Mr. Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;"><strong>For Respondent No. 1</strong></td>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;">: Mr. A.M. Amin Uddin, Senior Advocate, Mr. Md. Obaidur Rahman Mostafa, Advocate, Ms. Sabrina Zerin, Advocate and Mr. Mdbdul Quiyum, Advocate instructed by Mr. Mohammad Abdul Hai, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;"><strong>For Respondent Nos. 2-5</strong></td>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;">: Not represented.</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;"><strong>Date of Hearing</strong></td>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;">: 18-10-2023 & 15-11-2023</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;"><strong>Date of Judgment</strong></td>
        <td style="vertical-align: top;">: 23-11-2023</td>
      </tr>
    </table>
  </div>

  <div>
    <h3 style="text-align: center; text-decoration: underline;">JUDGMENT</h3>
    
    <p><strong>Md. Ashfaqul Islam, J:</strong></p>

    <p>1. This civil appeal by leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 22.08.2016, passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 1575 of 2006 making the Rule absolute.</p>

    <p>2. Facts, in short, are that the present appellant along with respondent No.2, as plaintiffs instituted Title Suit No. 199 of 2001 before the 1st Court of Assistant Judge, Dhaka, praying for declaration that the application of Conservancy and Pilotage Service Fees Rules, 1990 over the Costal Ships and Tankers of the plaintiffs established under the Merchants Shipping Ordinance, 1983 is illegal and also for declaration that the letters dated 17.06.2001 and 25.6.2001 and circular vide letter No. M-2/15/47(4) are illegal and unlawful.</p>

    <p>3. The trial Court dismissed the suit. Against which appeal was preferred and the same was allowed by setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court. Challenging the said decision the defendants filed Civil Revision before the High Court Division and obtained Rule. A Single Bench of the High Court Division made the Rule absolute upon setting aside the judgment and decree of the appellate Court and affirming those of the trial Court. Hence, the plaintiff No. 1 preferred civil petition for leave to appeal before this division and obtained leave giving rise to this appeal.</p>

    <p>4. Mr. Kamal-ul-Alam, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant submits that the High Division committed an error of law in passing the impugned judgment and order holding that having not been vested with any right to declare any law void the court of appeal below erred in declaring the imposition of conservancy fees under Section 3 of the "-        ,  (hereinafter referred to as Bidhimala, 1990) as illegal.</p>

    <p>5. Next he submits that the conservancy fees are leviable only on " " as defined in Bidhimala, 1990 and payable by the "" of " " registered under the provision of the said Bidhimala, 1990 and as such the demands made in the impugned notices for payment of conservancy fees from the members of the plaintiffs' samity (Association) whose tankers and coasting ships ply in the river ways which are not " " but are coasting Ships as defined and whose "ownerships" are registered under the provisions of Merchant Shipping Ordinance, 1983. Without considering the aforesaid provisions of law the High Court Division erred in law in abruptly passing the impugned Judgment and order.</p>

    <p>6. He further submits that the members of the plaintiffs' samity (Association) are the owners of ships/tankers as defined in Section 2(47) and "coasting ship" as defined in section 2(4) of the Merchant Shipping Ordinance, 1983 which are not " " as defined in -() of Bidhimala, 1990 read with Section-2(e) and (f) of the Inland shipping Ordinance, 1976 and the members of plaintiffs' samity (Association) are the ""/owner of the said vessels as defined in Section-2(26) and the same are registered under Section 14 and 26 of the Merchant Shipping Ordinance, 1983, consequently the High Court Division was wrong in law in not holding that the said tankers and coasting ships of the members of plaintiffs' samity (Association) not being " " as defined in -() of Bidhimala, 1990 the conservancy fee is not payable by the members of plaintiffs' samity (Association).</p>

    <p>7. On the other hand Mr. A.M. Amin Uddin, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent No. 1 made his submissions supporting the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division.</p>

    <p>8. We have heard the learned Advocates of both sides and perused the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division together with the decisions of the courts below.</p>

    <p>9. It is admitted that the ships or the vessels owned by the members of the plaintiffs' Association are mainly ship and vessel in the coastal area but they have to transport petroleum fuel and other goods within the Inland River Way. And the Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) is authorized for imposition fees upon the costal and Oil Tanker which are running or transporting within the Inland Water Ways under the provision of Bidhimala, 1990 which was enacted in pursuant to Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority Ordinance, 1958. The relevant provisions of the said Bidhimala are produced verbatim as under:-</p>

    <blockquote style="background: #f1f1f1; padding: 10px; border-left: 3px solid #555;">
      ", ,   -///-/- Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority Ordinance, 1958 (E.P. Ord. LXXV of 1958)  section 19  sub-section (3) [ section (2)  clause (VII)                 , <br><br>
           ()   -       ,    <br>
      ()            /      <br><br>
       -        ,  ,-<br>
      () " "    ,  (Ord. No. LXXII of 1976)    ; <br>
      ()         <br><br>
       -  ()        -      , -
    </blockquote>

    <table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" style="width: 100%; border-collapse: collapse; margin-top: 10px; margin-bottom: 20px;">
      <tr>
        <td colspan="3">()    .....      </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td colspan="3">()    :</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td style="width: 40%;">() </td>
        <td style="width: 20%;"> </td>
        <td style="width: 40%;">    </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>()  </td>
        <td> </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>() </td>
        <td> </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>() </td>
        <td> </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>() </td>
        <td> </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>()   - (self-propelled vessel)</td>
        <td> </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
    </table>

    <p>10. Pertinently, let us see the definition of Inland Ship as envisaged in the Inland Shipping Ordinance (Ordinance No.LXXII of 1976). Section 2(e) defines Inland Ship. It enjoins the definition which is worded as under:</p>

    <blockquote>
      "2(e) "inland ship" means every description of vessel ordinarily plying on inland waters and propelled wholly or in part by steam, liquid fuel, electricity or any other mechanical powers and includes a sailing boat, dumb barge and other craft which is not so propelled but is towed or pushed by a vessel so propelled."
    </blockquote>

    <p>11. Combined reading of both the impugned Bidhimala 1990 and the Ordinance 1976 justify the imposition of conservancy fees as aforesaid.</p>

    <p>12. Now, let us further evaluate the entire case on the appraisal of the imposition of the conservancy fees under the Bidhimala 1990.</p>

    <p>13. The learned Advocate for the appellant claims that imposition any conservancy fees by Bidhimala, 1990 shall be double jeopardy for the members of their association because they have to bear taxes for the Coastal Authorities as well as Inland Authorities. But it reveals that the coastal authorities and the Inland River Authorities are different jurisdictions with different types of services, therefore, as per Bidhimala, 1990 any imposition cannot be declared illegal or without lawful authority unless or until Bidhimala is declared illegal.</p>

    <p>14. The appellate court below came to a conclusion that any civil court can entertain any matter where interpretation in respect of law to be declared illegal, even the constitutional provision, within the framework of Order XXVIIA Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure which reads as follows:-</p>

    <blockquote>
      "R.1. In any suit in which it appears to the court that any substantial question as to the interpretation of constitutional law is involved, the court shall not proceed to determine that question until after notice has been given to the Attorney General for Bangladesh if the question of law concerns the Government***"
    </blockquote>

    <p>15. The findings of the appellate Court below banking on Order XXVIIA Rules 1 and 2 as mentioned above leads to absurdity, simply because the said law enjoins that where any substantial question as to the interpretation of constitutional law is involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question until after notice has been given to the Attorney General for Bangladesh. To our utter surprise it reveals that the Appellate Court below even did not act accordingly. The findings of the High Court Division on that score is well founded. When the lower appellate Court took notice of Order XXVIIA of the Code of Civil Procedure, it could easily notify the Attorney General of Bangladesh in terms of the said provision of the Code of Civil Procedure.</p>

    <p>16. To sum up, first of all, we endorse the view of the High Court Division that the imposition of fees in question is not a double jeopardy. Rather it is absolutely justified.</p>

    <p>17. In the context of adjudicating such a case before this Division where the crucial question of balancing commercial interests and environmental stewardship between parties as well as that of the river is concerned, we grapple with the question of imposing conservancy fees on sea-going oil tankers that traverse inland waters and utilize rivers to access the open sea via estuaries. The ship-owners, in their defense, contend that they fall outside the category of vessels exclusively navigating inland rivers. They further argue that imposing such fees would amount to double jeopardy and inflict undue hardship upon them. However, a closer examination reveals compelling reasons for rationalizing these fees.</p>

    <p>18. In rationalizing the imposition of conservancy fees on sea-going oil tankers navigating inland waters and rivers, despite ship-owners' arguments of exemption and double jeopardy, several points can be asserted. Firstly, the definition of a river includes any watercourse naturally flowing towards a sea, estuary, or lake. Sea-going vessels utilizing these riverways for navigation inherently fall within the purview of vessels using inland waters. Thus, they are subject to relevant fees aimed at maintaining the navigability and health of these watercourses. Secondly, while ship-owners may contend that such fees constitute double jeopardy, it must be underscored that the purpose of conservancy fees is distinct from other maritime charges. These fees specifically contribute to the upkeep and preservation of inland waterways, which are crucial for maritime commerce and environmental sustainability. Therefore, the imposition of conservancy fees is not duplicative but rather serves a distinct regulatory purpose. Moreover, the argument that sea-going vessels are not directly benefiting from inland waterways neglects the interconnectedness of maritime transportation networks. Even if primarily bound for the sea, these vessels rely on riverways for access to ports and estuaries, thereby benefiting from the infrastructure and maintenance funded by conservancy fees. Lastly, acknowledging the significant government expenditure required to maintain river health and navigability underscores the necessity of equitable contributions from all users, including sea-going vessels. In conclusion, the imposition of conservancy fees on sea-going oil tankers navigating inland waters is justifiable both legally and practically, ensuring the sustainable management of vital maritime resources for the benefit of all stakeholders.</p>

    <p>19. It is to be understood by all stakeholders that the conservancy fees are not punitive measures but rather investments in sustainable river management. Ship-owners, as beneficiaries of efficient river navigation, play an essential role in safeguarding these vital waterways. By recognizing the interconnectedness of rivers, estuaries, and the open sea, we can uphold both economic interests and environmental well-being.</p>

    <p>20. The case in hand is indeed of such an impact which as we have discussed above manifestly maintained that the High Court Division was absolutely justified in holding that the Court of appeal below committed an error of law by allowing the appeal and thereby declaring the imposition of conservancy fees by section 3 of the Bidhimala, 1990 illegal and hence cannot be gainsaid that there is a denial of justice in any manner. The judgment and order passed by the High Court Division is elaborate, speaking and well composed. We are not inclined to interfere with the same.</p>

    <p>21. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed without any order as to costs.</p>
  </div>

</div>

===End===
===20SCOBAD42===
<div style="font-family: 'Times New Roman', Times, serif; font-size: 18px; line-height: 1.6; color: #000; text-align: justify;">

    <div style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 20px;">
        <h3 style="margin: 0;">APPELLATE DIVISION</h3>
        <p style="margin: 5px 0;"><b>Present:</b><br>
        Mr. Justice Syed Refaat Ahmed, Chief Justice<br>
        Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam<br>
        Mr. Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury<br>
        Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Haque<br>
        Mr. Justice S.M. Emdadul Hoque</p>
    </div>

    <div style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 20px;">
        <h4 style="margin: 0; text-decoration: underline;">CIVIL APPEAL NO. 84, 85 & 86 OF 2024</h4>
        <p style="margin: 5px 0;">(From the judgment and order dated 11.07.2010 passed by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.512, 513 and 514 of 2010)</p>
    </div>

    <div style="margin-bottom: 20px;">
        <p>
            <b>Mohammad Sohel Rana and others</b><br>
            ................................................ Appellants
        </p>
        <p style="text-align: center;"><b>-Versus-</b></p>
        <p>
            <b>The Public Service Commission, represented by its chairman and others.</b><br>
            ................................................ Respondents
        </p>
    </div>

    <table style="width: 100%; border-collapse: collapse; margin-bottom: 20px;">
        <tr style="vertical-align: top;">
            <td style="width: 25%; font-weight: bold;">For the appellants<br>(In all the appeals)</td>
            <td style="width: 5%;">:</td>
            <td>Mr. Md. Salah Uddin Dolon, Senior Advocate, instructed by Mr. Md. Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr style="vertical-align: top;">
            <td style="font-weight: bold;">For the appellant<br>(Added appellant No.90)<br>(In C.A. No.84 & 84/24)</td>
            <td>:</td>
            <td>Not represented</td>
        </tr>
        <tr style="vertical-align: top;">
            <td style="font-weight: bold;">For the Respondents<br>(In all the appeals)</td>
            <td>:</td>
            <td>Not represented.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr style="vertical-align: top;">
            <td style="font-weight: bold;">Date of Hearing</td>
            <td>:</td>
            <td>05-01-2025, 18-02-2025 & 19-02-2025</td>
        </tr>
        <tr style="vertical-align: top;">
            <td style="font-weight: bold;">Date of Judgment</td>
            <td>:</td>
            <td>20-02-2025</td>
        </tr>
    </table>

    <div style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 20px;">
        <h2 style="margin: 0; text-decoration: underline;">JUDGMENT</h2>
    </div>

    <p><b>Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury, J:</b></p>

    <p><b>1.</b> Pursuant to the Circular dated 28.06.2005, the appellants, having the requisite educational qualifications, applied for taking part in the 27th BCS examination. Upon completion of the primary selection process, they appeared in the preliminary test, held on 18.11.2005, and having qualified in the same, they took part in the written examination, which was held between 18th March, 2006 and 9th April, 2006. On being successful, they were asked to appear in the viva voce examination, which was held between 10th September, 2006 and 20th December, 2006.</p>

    <p><b>2.</b> The appellants successfully passed the viva voce examination, with the final result being published on 21.01.2007. The Bangladesh Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as BPSC), vide Memo dated 18.02.2007, recommended 3567 successful candidates, including the appellants, for being appointed in different cadres.</p>

    <p><b>3.</b> In the meantime, some reports were published in different news papers raising certain allegations with regard to the 27th BCS examination, which was, however, refuted by BPSC. Furthermore, in reply to the Ministry of Establishment's letter dated 21.03.2007, the Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, by letter dated 27.03.2007, opined that necessary action could only be taken against the persons concerned if specific allegations were investigated and proved under the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1956. However, no such inquiry was conducted by the Ministry of Establishment.</p>

    <p><b>4.</b> Subsequently, the Medical Examination of the successful candidates including the appellants commenced on 07.04.2007, but it was abruptly postponed on 18.04.2007 without assigning any reason.</p>

    <p><b>5.</b> In an unprecedented move, the then Caretaker Government decided to cancel the final result of the 27th BCS which had already been published by BPSC. Accordingly, by Memo dated 12.06.2007, the Ministry of Establishment requested BPSC to retake the viva-voce examination of all the successful candidates of the 27th BCS upon cancelling the result of the previous viva voce examination. Challenging the aforesaid decision, Writ Petition No. 6349 of 2007, Writ Petition No. 6384 of 2007 and Writ Petition No. 6393 of 2007 were filed. However, upon hearing the parties, the Rules were discharged by judgment and order dated 03.07.2008.</p>

    <p><b>6.</b> Meanwhile, the second viva voce examination was conducted from 29.07.2007 until 18.05.2008 and the result was published on 23.09.2008, recommending 3239 candidates for being appointed in different cadres under the 27th BCS, excluding, however, 1137 candidates including the appellants, who had previously qualified in the first viva voce examination. Accordingly, a notification was published in the Bangladesh Gazette on 10.11.2008.</p>

    <p><b>7.</b> The present appellants along with several other candidates, who had earlier qualified in the first viva voce examination, filed Writ Petition Nos.8307 of 2008, 8320 of 2008, 9151 of 2008, 4979 of 2009, 8076 of 2009, 8177 of 2009, 7838 of 2009 and 8254 of 2009 challenging the result published by BPSC on 23.09.2008 as well as the office order dated 20.10.2008. Upon hearing the parties, the High Court Division disposed of the Rules by judgments and orders dated 11.11.2009 and 26.01.2010, directing the concerned respondents to appoint the candidates, including the present appellants, who had been successful in the first viva voce examination, in their respective cadres.</p>

    <p><b>8.</b> Challenging the said decision, the Government preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.512, 513 and 514 of 2010. By judgment and order dated 11.07.2010, this Division disposed of the leave petitions upon setting aside the judgment and order of the High Court Division dated 11.11.2009. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appellants preferred Civil Review Petition Nos.197-199 of 2024 and leave was granted by this Division by order dated 07.11.2024, which gave rise to the present Civil Appeals.</p>

    <p><b>9.</b> Mr. Zainul Abedin, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants in all the appeals, submits that more than three thousand five hundred candidates including the appellants had qualified in the 27th BCS, having been successful in the preliminary, written and viva voce examinations. However, in 2007, pursuant to the directive issued by the then Caretaker Government, BPSC cancelled the result of the first viva voce examination and conducted the second viva voce examination. Resultantly, almost 1,200 candidates, who had earlier qualified in the first viva voce examination, were denied appointment on the ground of being unsuccessful in the second viva voce examination.</p>

    <p><b>10.</b> Mr. Abedin further submits that previously, another set of writ petitions were filed challenging the cancellation of the result of the first viva voce examination, but the Rules issued therein were discharged. He further submits that the judgment and order of the High Court Division passed in the second set of Writ Petitions was set aside by the Appellate Division without granting leave, which was not only violative of the provisions of the Constitution and the Appellate Division Rules, but it was also against all norms of fairness and justice. He submits forcefully that merely on the basis of presumption, the result of the first viva voce examination was cancelled for the purpose of 'restoring public confidence' in view of certain adverse reports that had been published in the newspapers.</p>

    <p><b>11.</b> Mr. Abedin further contends that the instant case is a classic example of miscarriage of justice. Elaborating his submission, he submits that the decision by BPSC to retake the viva voce examination at the dictate of the then Caretaker Government was not only without lawful authority, it was malafide too since neither any law nor any Rules permit the taking of a 'second viva voce examination'. Since every malafide act is a nullity in the eye of law, therefore, according to Mr.Abedin, the instant appeals are liable to succeed and the judgment and order of the High Court Division is required to be affirmed with a direction upon the respondents to appoint all the deprived candidates of the 27th BCS, who had succeeded in the first viva voce examination, in their respective cadres with all attending benefits.</p>

    <p><b>12.</b> On the other hand, Mr. Muhammad Khalequzzaman Bhuiyan, the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent Nos.1,2, 6 and 7, submits that the Appellate Division had carefully considered all the material facts and legal aspects of the matter in question and disposed of the Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal and therefore, no interference is called for.</p>

    <p><b>13.</b> This entire episode, albeit sad and regrettable, owes its origin to certain press reports published in February, 2007 in several national dailies raising allegations of irregularities in the process of recruitment of the 27th BCS, which was conducted by BPSC between November, 2005 and December, 2006. Although the reports were unsubstantiated, nevertheless, the Ministry of Establishment issued the Memo dated 12.06.2007 communicating the Government's decision to cancel the result of the first viva voce examination and directing BPSC to retake the viva voce examination.</p>

    <p><b>14.</b> Feeling aggrieved by the Government's decision to retake the viva voce examination, several candidates, who had already been selected on being successful in the first viva voce examination, moved this Court by filing two sets of writ-petitions.</p>

    <p><b>15.</b> In the first set of writ petitions, namely Writ Petition Nos. 6349 of 2007, 6384 of 2007 and 6393 of 2007, the Rules were issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the decision to cancel the result of the viva voce examination of the 27th BCS examination and the declaration of a new schedule for retaking the viva voce examination should not be declared to be without lawful authority.</p>

    <p><b>16.</b> In the second set of writ petitions, namely Writ Petition No. 8307 of 2008, Writ Petition No. 8320 of 2008, Writ Petition No. 9151 of 2008 and Writ Petition No. 4979 of 2009, the Rules were issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the result of the viva voce examination, published by BPSC on 23.09.2008 and the office order dated 20.10.2008 should not be declared to be without lawful authority along with a prayer for issuing a direction upon the respondents to consider the petitioners' appointment.</p>

    <p><b>17.</b> At the outset of the discussion, let us refer to the Memo dated 12.06.2007, which reads as follows:</p>

    <div style="background-color: #f9f9f9; border: 1px solid #ccc; padding: 15px; margin: 20px 0; font-family: 'SolaimanLipi', 'Times New Roman', serif;">
        <p>  <br>
        : /-/-<br>
        :  ,   <br>
        : ,     ,    , , <br>
         , - <br>
        :    /   </p>

        <p><b>:                   </b><br>
        :       -/- ()/, : ..</p>

        <p>,<br>
               ,                               </p>

        <p> ,              </p>

        <p><br>
        : <br>
        //<br>
          </p>
    </div>

    <p><b>18.</b> While disposing of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.512, 513 and 514 of 2010, the Appellate Division held:</p>
    <blockquote>"There is no material on record to arrive at a conclusion that the decision was taken as per pressure of the Government."</blockquote>

    <p><b>19.</b> Quite clearly, the aforesaid observation is incorrect, particularly in view of the Memo dated 12.06.2007, quoted hereinabove, wherefrom it is evident that the Public Service Commission had acted in accordance with the directive issued by the Ministry of Establishment, communicating the Government's decision to cancel the result of the viva voce examination of the 27th BCS examination and retake the same.</p>

    <p><b>20.</b> This Division also held that the present writ-respondents had waived and/or relinquished their claim by appearing in the second viva voce examination, which constituted estoppel. As noted earlier, the decision to cancel the result of the viva voce examination was challenged by the present appellants in 2007 by filing Writ Petition Nos. 6349 of 2007, 6384 of 2007 and 6393 of 2007. However, consequent upon all the Rules being discharged, the writ-respondents had no option but to sit for the second viva voce examination under compelling circumstances. Moreover, the writ-respondents, with limited financial means and resources, were facing the mighty Government and, therefore, they had no other option but to sit for the second viva voce examination. Hence, the finding of this Division that relinquishment of their right by the writ-respondents constituted estopple is not tenable.</p>

    <p><b>21.</b> Furthermore, this Division held as under:</p>
    <blockquote>"In the present case the decision was taken for the public interest as there was wide spread allegation that the process of recruitment was tainted by irregularities and corruption."</blockquote>

    <p><b>22.</b> Once again, I am constrained to hold that this observation is not only erroneous, it is misconceived as well, being devoid of any substance. This Division observed that there was "allegations" regarding irregularities and corruption in the process of recruitment. However, no inquiry was conducted by the concerned Authority nor was any report furnished before this Division as to the nature and extent of the irregularities and corruption that is alleged to have been committed. Nevertheless, on the basis of such unsubstantiated press reports, the decision to cancel the first viva voce examination and retake the same was taken, which seriously prejudiced more than one thousand successful candidates.</p>

    <p><b>23.</b> We have taken note of the fact that at the relevant period, a Member of the Public Service Commission had resigned following the allegation of corruption. However, there is no document on record to indicate that the charge of alleged corruption of the concerned Member was linked with the process of recruitment of the 27th BCS examination.</p>

    <p><b>24.</b> As noted earlier, the Government preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.512, 513 and 514 of 2010. By judgment and order dated 11.07.2010, this Division disposed of the leave petitions upon setting aside the judgment and order of the High Court Division dated 11.11.2009.</p>

    <p><b>25.</b> At this juncture, we are called upon to address a pertinent issue, namely, the recent practice of the Appellate Division of setting aside the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division or the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, at the stage of hearing a petition seeking leave to appeal. This leads me to pose a very basic question- what is the purpose of granting leave?</p>

    <p><b>26.</b> Generally understood, leave is granted to consider the appellant(s) case on certain grounds of law and facts, giving an opportunity to the concerned respondent(s), in whose favour the impugned judgment had been passed, to have an opportunity to reply, in writing, to the grounds upon which the appellant(s) case is predicated. This is in accordance with the constitutional mandate of "due process", as enshrined in Article 31 of our Constitution.</p>

    <p><b>27.</b> Hence, the practice of setting aside any judgment and/or order passed by the High Court Division or the Administrative Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, without granting leave, is not only a gross violation of the principle of natural justice, it also deprives the concerned respondents from placing their case before the apex Court, a fundamental right granted to them under the Constitution. The principle <i>audi alteram partem</i> -no man should be condemned unheard- is now so well entrenched in the judicial system that any deviation therefrom is bound to be interfered with, even at the stage of review.</p>

    <p><b>28.</b> This novel, not to mention undesirable, practice ought to be 'nipped in the bud', that is, if it can still be regarded as being in the 'budding stage', since, regrettably, this practice has been prevalent for some years now, particularly on and from 2015. I am reminded of an old adage- 'Justice hurried, Justice buried'.</p>

    <p><b>29.</b> The foregoing discussion leads me to discuss another recent phenomenon of this Division -the practice of discharging a Rule issued by the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution at the time of hearing a petition challenging an interim order. In my view, this is absolutely "without lawful authority", as this Division has no power or authority to adjudicate and dispose of any application filed under Article 102 of the Constitution. Let me elaborate.</p>

    <p><b>30.</b> Article 102 of the Constitution reads as under:</p>
    <blockquote style="font-style: italic;">
        "102.(1) The High Court Division on the application of any person aggrieved, may give such directions or orders to any person or authority, including any person performing any function in connection with the affairs of the Republic, as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of this Constitution.<br>
        (2) The High Court Division may, if satisfied that no other equally efficacious remedy is provided by law-<br>
        (a) on the application of any person aggrieved, make an order-<br>
        (i) directing a person performing any functions in connection with the affairs of the Republic or of a local authority, to refrain from doing that which he is not permitted by law to do or to do that which he is required by law to do; or<br>
        (ii) declaring that any act done or proceeding taken by a person performing functions in connection with the affairs of the Republic or of a local authority, has been done or taken without lawful authority and is of no legal effect; or<br>
        (b) on the application of any person, make an order-<br>
        (i) directing that a person in custody be brought before it so that it may satisfy itself that he is not being held in custody without lawful authority or in an unlawful manner; or<br>
        ii) requiring a person holding or purporting to hold a public office to show under what authority he claims to hold that office.<br>
        (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the forgoing clauses, the High Court Division shall have no power under this article to pass any interim or other order in relation to any law to which article 47 applies.<br>
        (4) Whereon an application made under clause (1) or sub-clause (a) of clause (2), an interim order is prayed for and such interim order is likely to have the effect of-<br>
        (a) prejudicing or interfering with any measure designed to implement any development programme, or any development work; or<br>
        (b) being otherwise harmful to the public interest,<br>
        the High Court Division shall not make an interim order unless the Attorney-General has been given reasonable notice of the application and he (or an advocate authorised by him in that behalf) has been given an opportunity of being heard, and the High Court Division is satisfied that the interim order would not have the effect referred to in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause(b).<br>
        (5) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires, "person" includes a statutory public authority and any court or tribunal, other than a court or tribunal established under a law relating to the defence services of Bangladesh or any disciplined force or a tribunal to which article 117 applies."
    </blockquote>

    <p><b>31.</b> On a careful perusal of the constitutional provision quoted above, it is apparent that the High Court Division has been vested with exclusive jurisdiction to decide an application filed by an 'aggrieved person' under Article 102 of the Constitution. It is equally apparent that this jurisdiction has not been extended or granted to the Appellate Division. Hence, any order passed by this Division discharging any Rule issued by the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be void ab initio, being in gross violation of the Constitution. In my considered view, this is judicial anarchy-plain and simple.</p>

    <p><b>32.</b> Of late, it has become an unfortunate episode that in certain cases, Judges tend to lean towards the Government and pass decisions which are ex facie contrary to the Constitution. In my view, in addition to the concept of procedural fairness, time has now come for the Judges to act and discharge their duties in accordance with "judicial fairness", which implies that Judges must not only act according to law, they must also act fairly and diligently towards the litigants in the dispensation of justice.</p>

    <p><b>33.</b> As has been so aptly stated by the Supreme Court of India in the case of <i>Sadhuram Bansal vs Pulin Bihari Sarker and others</i>, reported in AIR (1984) (SC) 1471,</p>
    <blockquote>"We would do well to remember that justice - social, economic and political- is preamble to our Constitution. Administration of justice can no longer be merely protector of legal rights but must whenever possible be dispenser of social justice." (per S.Murtaza Fazal Ali, J)</blockquote>

    <p><b>34.</b> Be that as it may, having regard to the foregoing discussion, by a unanimous decision of this Court, all the appeals are allowed.</p>

    <p><b>35.</b> Consequently, the judgment and order of this Court dated 11.07.2010 passed in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.512, 513 and 514 of 2010 are hereby set aside.</p>

    <p><b>36.</b> Resultantly, the judgment and order of the High Court Division dated 11.11.2009 passed in Writ Petition Nos.8307 of 2008, 8320 of 2008, 9151 of 2008, 4979 of 2009 and the judgment and order dated 26.01.2010 passed in Writ Petition Nos. 8076 of 2009, 8177 of 2009, 7838 of 2009 and 8254 of 2009 stand revived and duly affirmed.</p>

    <p><b>37.</b> The application for addition of party stands allowed.</p>

    <p><b>38.</b> The concerned respondents are directed to comply with directive passed by the High Court Division in the judgments and orders dated 11.11.2009 and 26.01.2010 forthwith.</p>

</div>
===End===
===20SCOBAD51===
<div style="font-family: 'Times New Roman', Times, serif; font-size: 16px; line-height: 1.5; color: #000; text-align: justify;">

<div style="text-align: center; font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 10px;">
    APPELLATE DIVISION<br>
    Present:<br>
    Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam<br>
    Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Haque<br>
    Mr. Justice S. M. Emdadul Hoque
</div>

<div style="text-align: center; margin-bottom: 10px;">
    CRIMINAL PETITION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL NO. 345 OF 2025<br>
    WITH<br>
    CRIMINAL PETITION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL NO. 569 OF 2025<br>
    WITH<br>
    CRIMINAL PETITION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL NO. 677 OF 2025<br>
    <span style="font-weight: normal; font-size: 14px;">(From the judgment and order dated 27.11.2024 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 12374 of 2018 heard analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 12401 of 2018)</span>
</div>

<div style="margin-bottom: 10px;">
    The State<br>
    The Anti-Corruption Commission, represented by the Chairman<br>
    <br>
    -Versus-<br>
    <br>
    Begum Khaleda Zia and another<br>
    Md. Ziaul Islam (Munna) and another
</div>

<div style="margin-bottom: 10px;">
    <table style="width: 100%; border: none;">
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top; width: 30%;"><b>For the Petitioner</b><br>(In cr.p. No. 345 of 2025)</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top; width: 5%;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">Mr. Aneek R. Haque, Additional Attorney-General with Mr. Johirul Islam Sumon, Deputy Attorney-General and Ms. Fatima Akter, Assistant Attorney-General, instructed by Mr. Md. Helal Amin, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;"><b>For the Petitioner</b><br>(In cr,p. Nos. 569 and 677 of 2025)</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">Mr. Ashif Hasan, Senior Advocate, Instructed by Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;"><b>For the Respondents</b><br>(In cr,p. No. 345 of 2025)</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">Mr. A.M. Mahbubuddin, Senior Advocate with Mr. Ruhul Quddus, Senior Advocate, Mr. Bodruddoza, Senior Advocate and Mr. Aminul Islam, Advocate instructed by Mr. Satya Ranjon Mondall, Advocate-on-Record.</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;"><b>For the Respondents</b><br>(In cr,p. Nos. 569 and 677 of 2025)</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">Not represented</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;"><b>Date of Hearing</b></td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">03-03-2025</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;"><b>Date of Judgment</b></td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">:</td>
            <td style="vertical-align: top;">03-03-2025</td>
        </tr>
    </table>
</div>

<div style="text-align: center; font-weight: bold; margin-bottom: 10px;">
    JUDGMENT
</div>

<p><b>Md. Rezaul Haque, J:</b></p>

<p>1. The delay of 18 days and 23 days in filing Criminal Petition for leave to Appeal Nos. 569 of 2025 and 677 of 2025 respectively is condoned.</p>

<p>2. Criminal Petition for leave to Appeal Nos. 345 of 2025, 569 of 2025 and 677 of 2025 have been directed against the judgment and order dated 27.11.2024 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 12374 of 2018 heard analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 12401 of 2018 allowing the appeals.</p>

<p>3. These Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeal have been heard together and disposed of by this common judgment and order since common questions of facts and law are involved.</p>

<p>4. The prosecution case in the aforesaid Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeal, in brief, is that Begum Khaleda Zia, during her tenure from 2001-2006 as Prime Minister of Bangladesh had formed a trust, namely "Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust" vide a registered trust deed being No. IV-33, dated 26.10.2004. She opened a Savings Account being No. 34076165 with Sonali Bank, Prime Minister's Office on 09.09.2005 in the name of the Said Trust.</p>

<p>5. During the period from 13.01.2005 to 19.01.2005 various sums of money amounting to Tk. 6,18,89,529/- (Taka Six crore Eighteen lac Eighty-Nine thousand Five hundred Twenty-Nine) were withdrawn from different accounts of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party and the same were deposited in the account of the said trust.</p>

<p>6. No money was spent from the trust account for any charitable purpose, rather Begum Khaleda Zia, the then Prime Minister, in the disguise of the trust had spent money for purchasing 42 Kathas land in Kakrail in the name of "Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust", wherein she paid, in addition to the value of the land, extra Tk. 1,24,93,000/- (Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-Three thousand) to vendor Suraiya Khan as to which no satisfactory explanation has been given which established that she (the then Prime Minister) had misappropriated the same dishonestly.</p>

<p>7. Apart from the money deposited from various accounts of Bangladesh Nationalist Party, other funds had been deposited in the account of the said trust amounting to Tk. 1,35,00,000+ 55,50,000 = 1,90,50,000/- (Taka One crore Ninety lac Fifty thousand) did not have a valid source for which it is apparent that Begum Khaleda Zia (who has been shown as serial No. 1 as an accused), in collusion with other accused persons, committed offence under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860.</p>

<p>8. The case was investigated by the informant Harun-or-Rashid, Deputy Director, the Anti-Corruption Commission, who submitted charge sheet against the accused No. 1 & 3 along with two others under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860.</p>

<p>9. Thereafter, the case record was transmitted to the learned Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, who took cognizance against the accused and transferred the case to Special Judge, Court No.3, Dhaka for trial wherein the case was renumbered as Special Case No. 18 of 2017. The learned Special Judge framed charge against the accused persons under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860 and the charge so framed was read over and explained to the accused persons who were present to which they pleaded not guilty of the offence and claimed to be tried. Charge could not be read over and explained to absconding accused Abul Haris Chowdhury.</p>

<p>10. The case was transferred to learned Special Judge, Court No.5, Dhaka for trial as per the order dated 17/05/2017 of the High Court Division passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 19967/2017.</p>

<p>11. During trial, prosecution examined as many as 33 (thirty-three) witnesses but the defence examined none. Upon conclusion of the examination of the prosecution witnesses, the accused Nos. 1 & 3 were examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in which they submitted written statements describing their innocence.</p>

<p>12. Defence case, as it transpires from the statement submitted by Begum Khaleda Zia (shown as accused No. 1) under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the trend of cross- examination of the prosecution witnesses, is that, Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust is a private trust established in the memory of Begum Khaleda Zia's beloved husband, Shaheed President Ziaur Rahman and Begum Khaleda Zia was the first Managing Trustee of the said trust in her personal capacity, and her role as trustee had nothing to do with her official position as the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, or her official position did not have any direct or indirect influence in the affairs of the trust. The money deposited in the trust account represents donations and contributions made by workers, activists and supporters of BNP across the country and all money deposited in the trust fund came from valid sources.</p>

<p>13. The learned Special Judge, after conclusion of the trial, vide judgment and order dated 29.10.2018, convicted Begum Khaleda Zia i.e. the respondent No. 1 in Cr.PLA No. 345 of 2025 under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and sentenced her to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years and to pay a fine of Tk. 10,00,000/- (Taka Ten lac), in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of six months more. The property which was bought in the name of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable trust was confiscated in favour of the State.</p>

<p>14. The learned Special Judge also convicted the accused No.3 Md. Ziaul Islam (Munna) under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years and to pay a fine of Tk. 10,00,000/- (Taka Ten lac), in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of six months more.</p>

<p>15. The learned Judge also convicted accused No.2-Abul Haris Chowdhury and accused No.4- Monirul Islam Khan under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with section 109 of the Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced each of them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of seven years and to pay a fine of Tk. 10,00,000/- (Taka Ten lac) each, in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of six months more.</p>

<p>16. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order of conviction and sentence of the learned Special Judge, Begum Khaleda Zia filed Criminal Appeal No. 12374 of 2018 and accused No. 3 filed Criminal Appeal No. 12401 of 2018 before the High Court Division. The High Court Division, after hearing, vide judgment and order dated 27.11.2024 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 12374 of 2018 heard analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 12401 of 2018 allowed the appeals setting aside the judgment and order of the learned Special Judge and thereby, acquitted the accused persons, namely, Begum Khaleda Zia, accused No. 3 and others from the charge leveled against them.</p>

<p>17. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division, the State and the Anti-Corruption Commission (hereinafter referred to as 'the Commission') being petitioners filed these Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeal.</p>

<p>18. Mr. Aneek R. Haque, learned Additional Attorney-General along with Mr. Johirul Islam Sumon, learned Deputy Attorney-General and Ms. Fatima Akter, learned Assistant Attorney-General, appearing for the petitioner-State in Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 345 of 2025, made submissions stating that the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division suffers from legal infirmity inasmuch as the prosecution was able to prove the prosecution case beyond all reasonable doubt since there is evidence on record for convicting the accused persons. He has further submitted that the High Court Division committed errors of law acquitting the respondent No. 1 inasmuch as the witnesses corroborated with each other in respect of the offence committed by the respondent No. 1 but the respondent No. 1 could not establish her innocence by cross-examining the PWs. He has also submitted that the informant has supported the FIR story in toto, as such, the judgment and order of acquittal has no basis at all, and accordingly, leave may be granted to address the errors of law committed by the high Court Division and thereby, set aside the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the High Court Division on merit.</p>

<p>19. Mr. Ashif Hasan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner-Commission in Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 569 of 2025 and 677 of 2025, has adopted the same argument advanced by Mr. Aneek R. Haque, learned Additional Attorney-General. He has added though the learned judge of the trial Court has rightly passed the judgment and order of conviction, yet the High Court Division failed to appreciate that the prosecution has been able to prove the case beyond all reasonable doubt and as such, the impugned Judgment and order passed by High Court Division may kindly be set aside.</p>

<p>20. Per contra, Mr. A.M. Mahbubuddin, learned Senior Advocate along with Mr. Ruhul Quddus, learned Senior Advocate, Mr. Bodruddoza, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. Aminul Islam, learned Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondents of Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 345 of 2025 have strongly opposed the instant leave petition supporting the judgment and order of acquittal dated 27.11.2024 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 12374 of 2018 heard analogously with Criminal Appeal No. 12401 of 2018.</p>

<p>21. No one appears on behalf of the respondents in Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 569 of 2025 and 677 of 2025 to oppose the leave petition.</p>

<p>22. We have heard the submissions of the learned Advocates appearing for the respective parties and perused the impugned judgment and order of the High Court Division along with other connected papers on record. Since both the parties are present before the court and they have delivered elaborate submissions, we are going to dispose of the Criminal Petitions for Leave to Appeals summarily on merit without granting any leave.</p>

<p>23. The prosecution case rests primarily upon the allegations that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. did not make any donation or payment in favour of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust; the deposit in the account of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust was in fact made by Mr. Monirul Islam, Private Secretary to the then Mayor of Dhaka City Corporation using the name of Metro Makers and Developers Ltd; said Monirul Islam stated that money was given to him by Mr. Abul Haris Chowdhury, Political Secretary to the then Prime Minister for depositing the same in the account of the said Trust; Tk. 55,50,000 (Taka Fifty-Five lac Fifty thousand) was deposited on different dates in the said trust including Tk. 27,00,000/- (Taka Twenty-Seven lac) which was deposited on 18.01.2005 by Md. Ziaul Islam, Private Secretary to the then Political Secretary to the Prime Minister who deposited the same in the account of the said Trust as per direction of Mr. Abul Haris Chowdhury; Begum Khaleda Zia by using her official position as the Prime Minister collected the aforesaid funds from various unlawful sources and she paid excess Tk. 1,24,93,000/= (Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-three thousand) to the vendor Suraiya Khan, aunt of Mr. Tarique Rahman's Wife, regarding which there is no satisfactory explanation by the prosecution which failed to establish that the then Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia had misappropriated the same in the guise of making additional payment to the vendor.</p>

<p>24. Upon perusal of the record, it appears that Tk. 6,18,89,529 (Taka Six crore Eighteen lac Eighty-Nine thousand Five hundred Twenty-Nine) was deposited in the account of the Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust which was received from the party fund of Bangladesh Nationalist Party in respect of which there is no dispute.</p>

<p>25. Defence firmly asserts that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. donated Tk. 1,35,00,000/- (Taka One crore Thirty-Five lac) to the said Trust by five payment Orders. Accused Md. Ziaul Islam received Tk. 55,50,000/- (Taka Fifty-Five lac Fifty thousand) from the workers, activists and supporters of BNP across the country and thereafter, he deposited the same in the account of the said Trust on behalf of them.</p>

<p>26. It transpires from the oral evidence on record that the authority of Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. denied the payment or donation to or in favour of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust. If for arguments sake, it is taken for granted that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. did not donate Tk. 1,35,00,000/- (Taka One crore Thirty-Five lac) in favour of the said Trust, the question of collecting fund from Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. by using the official position of Begum Khaldea Zia, the then Prime Minister, does not arise at all. However, the documentary and oral evidence on record shows that the Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. might have donated the aforesaid fund which has rightly been pointed out by the High Court Division. It transpires from the evidence on record, particularly from the deposition of Pw-21, Md. Zakaria Khan, DGM, Finance and Accounts, Metro Makers and Developers that Kazi Rashiduzzaman, AGM, Metro Makers and Developers Ltd, was the applicant of the alleged five pay orders in favour of the Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust through which Tk. 1,35,00,000/- (Taka One crore Thirty-Five lac) was deposited in the account of the said Trust. Pw-22, Ziauddin Sawlat Gani, Manager, Shahjalal Islami Bank Limited who had issued the said 5(five) payment orders deposed during cross-examination, "   -     -         -   -        "</p>

<p>27. So, it appears from the evidence on record both oral and documentary that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. is the applicant of the 5 payment orders in question. The High Court Division also, upon appreciating the evidence in the correct perspective, reached the same finding. Pw-32, the Investigating Officer of this case, deposed, "    -  -         -   -       -III series -     /-             :       - XI(C)    //     -  /-         XI(C)    ..                       ..       - XI(C)     ,,/-, ,/-, ,,/-, ,,,/-         - XI(C)  //        ,,/-  ,,/-     ..  ..                                  " Pw-32 further deposed, "..                     "</p>

<p>28. It transpires from the evidence on record that the account statement of the Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. demonstrates that applicable commission and VAT against the issuance of the said five payments orders were charged to the account of the said Company which negates the claim of the said company that it was not the originator of the impugned five payment orders. The High Court Division also rightly pointed out this vital aspect of the evidence which affects the merit of the case substantially. The Investigating Officer deposed at one stage of cross examination that he had investigated about the clearing cheques and recorded the statements of the persons concerned with the clearing cheques after interrogation but in the later stage of the cross-examination he deposed that he had not recorded the statements of the persons concerned with the clearing cheques after investigation which is contradictory to his previous statement, which creates doubt as to whether he had investigated about the clearing cheques at all. It appears that the Investigating Officer did not investigate the case properly.</p>

<p>29. It is well settled that the contents of documentary evidence should ordinarily get preference over oral evidence unless the alleged document is the product of forgery or false personation. The trial court failed to appreciate the documentary evidence juxtaposing the oral evidence of the Investigating Officer for which it reached erroneous conclusion that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. did not make payment in the account of the said Trust though there was reasonable doubt that Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. might have made payment in the account of the said Trust having regard to the account statement of the said company and oral testimony of the Investigating Officer that he did not record after interrogation the statements of the persons concerned with the clearing cheques dated 16.01.2005. The High Court Division rightly appreciated the documentary evidence in its correct perspective juxtaposing the oral evidence of the prosecution witnesses and thereby, correctly recorded the finding that Metro Makers and the Developers Ltd. might have paid Tk. 1,35,00,000/- (Taka One crore Thirty-Five lac) through 5(five) payment orders in the account of the said Trust. There is no evidence on record that Begum Khaleda Zia, the then Prime Minister, used her Official position to compel Metro Makers and Developers Ltd. to make donation in the account of the Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust.</p>

<p>30. The Investigating Officer, PW-32, deposed during his cross-examination, "              ,                 , -            ..                          -                                                             ,      .. ..                                                  "</p>

<p>31. The High Court Division rightly observed by quoting the aforesaid testimony of the Investigating Officer that the prosecution had failed to prove into or intentionally withheld evidence as to, the source of fund donated by the Metro Makers and Developers Ltd to Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust vide 5(five) payment Orders and the investigation of the Investigating Officer is incomplete and perfunctory.</p>

<p>32. There was no embargo in buying property in the name of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust as it appears from the testimony of Pw-1, the informant of this case, who deposed, "         ,          ". So, we donot find any illegality in buying immovable property in the name of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust. Now, it is to be seen whether Tk. 1,24,93,000/- (Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-Three thousand) in excess of consideration of the sale deed was given to the Vendor with bona fide intent to compensate the vendor for the value of some ancillary materials connected with the property. The Investigating Officer, Pw- 32, deposed during his cross-examination, "       ,,,/-                                ,   // / // ". Though Suraiya Khan was enlisted as a witness by the Anti-Corruption Commission, yet, she was not produced before the court and therefore, presumption under section 114 illustration (g) of the Evidence Act, 1872 can reasonably be drawn to the effect that if Suraiya Khan was produced before the court, she would not support the prosecution case. The reason assigned by the Investigating Officer that he did not believe the explanation given by Suraiya Khan for taking extra Tk. 1,24,93,000/-(Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-Three thousand) since she was aunt of Mr. Tarique Rahman's wife does not appear to be a sound one as relationship only cannot be the sole ground to disbelieve the statement of a witness where there may be other justifiable grounds to believe the same. In some cases there may remain some valuable objects in the property sold for the beneficial enjoyment of the property the value of which may not be included in the consideration of the sale deed which may be paid to the vendor later on upon mutual settlement. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case coupled with the testimony of the Investigating Officer it appears that the trial court failed to appreciate that Suraiya Khan took extra Tk. 1,24,93,000/- (Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-Three thousand) for the value of AC/Dish/Furniture/Fittings/Trees situated within the property which was sold to Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust and thereby, reached erroneous finding that Begum Khaleda Zia had misappropriated the same in collusion with Suraiya Khan. It appears from record that the High Court Division rightly appreciated this point and reached the finding that the prosecution had failed to prove that Begum Khaleda Zia had misappropriated Tk. 1,24,93,000/-(Taka One crore Twenty-Four lac Ninety-Three thousand) in the guise of making extra payment to vendor Suraiya Khan or anyone on behalf of Begum Khaleda Zia had owned the said money.</p>

<p>33. Prosecution firmly asserts that Begum Khaleda Zia in collusion with other accused by using her position as the Prime Minister collected fund from different persons and allowed it to be deposited in the account of Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust in the name of donation. It transpires from the Judgment and order of the trial Court that Begum Khaleda Zia was convicted for the offence described in section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, in short 'the Act, 1947', which states that a public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal misconduct if he, by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position as public servant, obtains or attempts to obtain for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. At this juncture, it is worth describing that the word obtain appearing in section 5(1)(d) of the Act, 1947 was interpreted in catena of cases which is much more pertinent to be discussed here for arriving at a correct decision in the case in hand.</p>

<p>34. In the case of <b>Ram Krishan and Others Vs. The State of Delhi</b>, reported in AIR 1956 SC 476, it was observed,<br>
"The word 'obtains', on which much stress was laid does not eliminate the idea of acceptance of what is given or offered to be given, though it connotes also an element of effort on the part of the receiver."</p>

<p>35. In the case of <b>C.K. Damodaran Nair Vs. Govt. of India</b>, reported in AIR 1997 SC 551, it was held,<br>
"The position will, however, be different so far as an offence under section 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2) of the Act is concerned. For such an offence prosecution has to prove that the accused 'obtained the valuable thing or pecuniary advantage by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position as a public servant and that too without the aid of the statutory presumption under section 4(1) of the Act as it is available only in respect of offences under section 5(1)(a) and (b)and not under section 5(1)(c), (d) or (e) of the Act. 'Obtain' means to secure or gain (something) as the result of request or effort (Shorter Oxford Dictionary). In case of obtainment the initiatives vests in the person who receives and in that context a demand or request from him will be a primary requisite for an offence under section 5(1)(d) of the Act unlike an offence under section 161 I.P.C, which, as noticed above, can be, established by proof of either 'acceptance'---- or 'obtainment'."</p>

<p>36. The aforesaid interpretation of the word obtain incorporated in section 5(1)(d) of the Act, 1947 was also followed in the case of <b>Subash Parbat Sonvane Vs. State of Gujarat</b>, reported in AIR 2003 SC 2169 and in the case of <b>R. Balakrishna Pillai Vs. State of Kerala</b>, reported in 2003 (9SCC) 700.</p>

<p>37. From the judicial pronouncements described hereinbefore, it appears that in order to prove criminal misconduct under section 5(1)(d) of the Act, 1947 the prosecution has to prove primarily the demand or request on the part of the accused for any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage either for himself or for other person and the burden of proof of the same lies on the prosecution as the statutory presumption against the accused incorporated in section 4 of the Act, 1947 does not extend to the offence described in section 5(1)(d) of the Act, 1947.</p>

<p>38. In this case, it appears that not a single prosecution witness deposed that Begum Khaleda Zia had demanded or had attempted to demand directly or indirectly from any institution or person any donation or pecuniary advantage for Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust. There is no evidence on record that she, by using her official position, bought property in the name of the said Trust at a reduced price compelling the vendor to agree to the same. It appears from the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses particularly from the testimonies of Pw-1 (Informant), Pw-18 (General Manager Sonali Bank and seizure list witness) and Pw-23 (ex Sonali Bank Officer and seizure list witness) that Begum Khaleda Zia did not use her official designation in the Trust deed or Account Opening Form, cheques or other papers connected with this case. The prime consideration, in the instant case, should have been to ascertain whether there had been any misuse of official position in collection of donation for Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust by Begum Khaleda Zia, which is not established by the evidence on record.</p>

<p>39. Upon perusal of record, it also transpires that there is no bar in the deed of Trust to receive donation from any person or class of persons and it also does not fix the limit as to what extent donation can be received. The informant of the case, Pw-1, deposed during cross- examination, "                                                             " So, it is clear from the above statement that any person can make donation to charitable trust (in the name of late President Ziaur Rahman). In some cases people make donations to charitable trust without disclosing their identity.</p>

<p>40. It has already been pointed out in the foregoing discussion that Anti-Corruption Commission failed to prove by evidence adduced either oral or documentary that Begum Khaleda Zia obtained donation or any other pecuniary advantage(s) for Shaheed Ziaur Rahman Charitable Trust by abusing her official position. Consequently, the principal offence as aforesaid being not proved, the allegation that accused Md. Ziaul Islam Munna or other accused abetted Begum Khaleda Zia in committing the principal offence stands not proved in the facts and circumstances of the case.</p>

<p>41. In view of the facts, circumstances and proposition of law discussed hereinabove, we are of the view that the High Court Division allowed the appeal upon proper appreciation of the facts and circumstances of the case in their correct perspective which does not call for any interference by this Division. Accordingly, Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 345 of 2025, 569 of 2025 and 677 of 2025 are dismissed summarily.</p>

</div>
===End===
===20SCOBAD61===

APPELLATE DIVISION

Present:
Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam
Mr. Justice S. M. Emdadul Hoque
Mr. Justice A. K. M. Asaduzzaman

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 726 OF 2016
(From the judgment and order dated 17.09.2013, passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 1843 of 2008)

Rezaul Haq
-Versus-
Mossammat Monwara Khanam and others.

For the Appellant: Mr. M. Qumrul Haque Siddique, Senior Advocate with Mr. Abul Kalam Chowdhury, Advocate instructed by Mr. Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondent No. 1: Mr. Nurul Amin, Senior Advocate instructed by Mr. M. Ashraf-Uz-Zaman Khan, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondent Nos.2-6: Not represented.

Date of Hearing: 20-05-2025
Date of Judgment: 20-05-2025

JUDGMENT

S. M. Emdadul Hoque, J:

1. This Civil Appeal, by leave granting order dated 15.11.2016 in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.162 of 2014 at the instance of the appellant, has been directed against the judgment and order dated 17.09.2013, passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No.1843 of 2008, making the Rule absolute.

2. Briefly stated, the facts relevant for disposal of this Appeal are that the plaintiff-respondent No.1, Mossammat Monwara Khanam, filed the Title Suit No.329 of 2003 in the Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Sadar, Noakhali, seeking a declaration of title and recovery of khas possession by evicting the defendant No. 1-appellant, Rejaul Haq, from the suit land described in the schedule of the plaint, stating, inter alia, that the suit land, measuring 18 decimals under Plot Nos.472 and 473 of Khatian No.175, originally belonged to Sadia Khatun and Entaz Miah. After the death of Entaz Miah, his heirs, namely, Abdul Khalek Miah, Abdul Malek Miah, Ruchia Khatun, Zakia Khatun, and his wife, Asia Khatun, became the owners of his share. Subsequently, Zakia Khatun transferred 1 1/4 decimals of land from Khatian No. 175 of Plot Nos. 472 and 473, along with other lands, to the plaintiff-respondent No.1 vide registered deed No. 4835 dated 15.05.1991. Later, Abdul Malek Miah transferred 2 6/16 decimals of land from the same plot to the plaintiff-respondent No.1 through registered deed No. 6834 dated 09.07.1991. The land was subsequently mutated in the names of the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and her husband in a separate Khatian No.772, and they remained in possession and regularly paid rents to the government. Thereafter, Asia Khatun, Abdul Khalek, and Ruchia Khatun purportedly transferred the suit land to defendant No.1-appellant vide deed No. 385 dated 11.01.1997, leading to a dispute between the parties. Despite assurances from the local residents to settle the matter through compromise, the defendant No.1-appellant attempted to set up a petrol pump on the suit land claimed by the plaintiff-respondent No.1. Since the plaintiff-respondent No.1 resided in Chattogram, she requested the defendant No.2-respondent No.2, through a letter dated 06.08.1997, not to grant any approval for setting up the petrol pump on the disputed land, but no action was taken. On 27.10.1997, the defendant No.1-appellant, with the help of hired thugs and labourers, allegedly removed soil from Plot Nos. 472 and 473, and dumped it onto the land of the plaintiff-respondent No.1. Although the plaintiff-respondent No.l's sister-in-law, Durlovi Begum, tried to resist, she was unable to prevent the dispossession. Hence, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was compelled to institute the suit.

3. The defendant No.1-appellant contested the suit by filing a written statement, denying all the material allegations made in the plaint, contending, inter alia, that the defendant No.1-appellant purchased the suit land on 11.01.1997 vide deed No. 385, measuring 5 7/10 decimals in Plot Nos. 472 and 473, and mutated the same through Mutation Case No.36/97-98 dated 21.07.1997, resulting in Mutation Khatian No.683. He erected a wall around the suit land, established a petrol pump by spending a huge amount of money, and has been carrying on business there. It was further stated that the lands of the defendant No.1-appellant and the plaintiff-respondent No.1 are different, and the defendant No.1-appellant did not dispossess the plaintiff-respondent No.1 from the suit land. The plaintiff-respondent No.1 instituted the suit only out of jealousy and was trying to harass the defendant No.1-appellant. Therefore, the defendant No.1-appellant prayed for dismissal of the suit.

4. During the trial, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 adduced the evidence of 4 (four) witnesses, while the defendant No.1-appellant adduced the evidence of 3 (three) witnesses and both sides submitted their relevant documents, marking them as exhibits.

5. After conclusion of the trial, the Senior Assistant Judge, Sadar, Noakhali, upon hearing the parties and considering the evidence on record, partly decreed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 29.09.2005.

6. Being aggrieved, the defendant No.1-appellant filed the Title Appeal No.235 of 2005 in the Court of the District Judge, Noakhali. Upon transfer, the appeal was heard by the Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Noakhali, who, vide judgment and decree dated 03.03.2008, allowed the appeal and reversed the judgment and decree dated 29.09.2005, passed by the Trial Court.

7. Being dissatisfied with the judgment and decree dated 03.03.2008, passed by the Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Noakhali, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 filed the Civil Revision No.1843 of 2008 in the High Court Division and obtained a Rule. Upon final hearing, the High Court Division, vide judgment and order dated 17.09.2013, made the Rule absolute, set aside the judgment and decree dated 03.03.2008, passed by the Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Noakhali, upheld the judgment and decree dated 29.09.2005, passed by the Senior Assistant Judge, Sadar, Noakhali and decreed the suit in part.

8. Being disgruntled with the judgment and order dated 17.09.2013, passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 1843 of 2008; the defendant No.1-appellant filed the Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.162 of 2014 in this Division. After hearing the parties, this Division allowed the Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal and granted leave on consideration of the submission of the learned Counsel for the leave-petitioner to the effect that since the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and the defendant No.1-appellant were purchasers from different co-sharers by inheritance, the suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession was not maintainable without a prayer for partition, and the Appellate Court as the last Court of fact, after properly adverting to the evidence on record, reversed the findings of the Trial Court regarding the plaintiff-respondent No.1's case of possession and dispossession, as such, the Appellate Court below rightly allowed the appeal and reversed the judgment and decree of the Trial Court; however, the High Court Division erred in law by interfering in revision without any finding of misreading or non-consideration of evidence by the Appellate Court. Hence, the Appeal.

9. Mr. M. Qumrul Haque Siddique, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the defendant No.1-appellant, submits that since the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and defendant No.1-appellant were purchasers from different co-sharers by inheritance, the suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession was not maintainable without a prayer for partition. However, the High Court Division erroneously restored the decree passed by the Trial Court.

10. He further submits that the Appellate Court, being the last Court of fact, after properly adverting to the evidence on record, reversed the findings of the Trial Court regarding the plaintiff-respondent No.1's claim of possession and dispossession, and consequently set aside the decree. Nonetheless, the High Court Division erred in law by interfering in revision without any finding of misreading or non-consideration of evidence by the Appellate Court.

11. Mr. Nurul Amin, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the plaintiff-respondent No.1, submits that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 purchased the suit land from some of the defendants of the original suit, and that defendant No.1-appellant subsequently took forcible possession. Hence, the suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession is maintainable in law; as a result, the Appellate Court below committed an error in law by holding otherwise.

12. He further submits that the Trial Court as well as the High Court Division, upon proper appraisal of the evidence on record, found that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 had prior possession and was dispossessed by the defendant No.1-appellant from the suit land. However, the Appellate Court below, without assigning any findings or observations in this regard, allowed the appeal and thereby erred in dismissing the suit.

13. He contends next that the Trial Court, on the basis of documentary and oral evidence as described in its judgment, held that the schedule of the plaintiff-respondent No.1's purchase deed would prevail over that of the defendant No.1-appellant, since the defendant No.1-appellant's purchase related to the same land but was made subsequently. As such, the judgment of the Appellate Court below allowing the appeal without addressing the specific findings of the Trial Court was erroneous.

14. Mr. Nurul Amin, the learned Senior Advocate, further submits that the learned Appellate Court below was wrong in holding that the suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was not maintainable without a partition by the co-sharers, and in failing to appreciate that there had been an amicable partition among the co-sharers. Both the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and defendant No.1-appelant stood on the same footing with regard to the partition, and therefore, the plaintiff-respondent No.1's prior purchase should take precedence.

15. He finally submits that the plaintiff-respondent No.1, by adducing evidence, proved the defendant No.1-appellant's forcible possession and use of the plaintiff-respondent No.1's land and had even sought to resolve the dispute through local salish/mediation. Since prior possession was proved, the decree passed in favour of the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was justified in law, and therefore, the Appeal is liable to be dismissed.

16. We have heard the learned Counsel of both sides and perused the impugned judgment of the High Court Division together with the decisions of the courts below.

17. In the instant suit, the core issue for disposal of the Appeal is whether a suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession is maintainable without a prayer for partition, where both the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and the defendant No.1-appellant have purchased the land from the co-sharers of the suit land.

18. In the matter under consideration, the Trial Court, after considering the evidence on record, found title in favour of the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and accordingly, partly decreed the suit. However, the Appellate Court below allowed the appeal, mainly taking the view that, in the case of ejmali property, a suit is not maintainable without a prayer for partition.

19. The Trial Court, in disposing of the suit, took view that the suit is maintainable and not barred by limitation. The Trial Court further opined that the plaintiff-respondent No.1, by adducing sufficient evidence, proved his title and possession over the suit land and also succeeded in proving the case of dispossession by the defendant No.1-appellant, and accordingly decreed the suit in part. In deciding the case between the parties, the Trial Court observed that:-
"            ()                ()      //                                       //                           //                           , -   , -  , , -                 //                   
            ,  //                          "

20. It is an admitted fact that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 purchased the land on 15.05.1991 through registered deed No. 4835 (Exhibit-2Ka) and also mutated her name. The Trial Court observed that after six years of the plaintiff-respondent No.1's purchase, the defendant No.1-appellant purchased the land through registered deed No. 385 dated 11.01.1997 (Exhibit-Ka) and took possession thereafter.

21. The Trial Court further opined that, since it is admitted that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was in continuous possession of the suit land prior to the possession taken by defendant No.1-appellant, and it is also admitted by the defendant No.1-appellant that he obtained possession of the suit land on 11.01.1997, accordingly, it is clearly evident to the Trial Court that the defendant No.1-appellant had no possession of the suit land before that date. It was also found by the Trial Court that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was in possession prior to the possession taken by defendant No.1-appellant.

22. Upon consideration of the evidence on record, both oral and documentary, the Trial Court finally opined that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 had proved her title, possession, and the case of dispossession by adducing sufficient evidence. Whereas it appears that the Appellate Court, without reversing the said findings of the Trial Court, set aside the judgment of the Trial Court. The Appellate Court only considered that, since the plaintiff-respondent No.1 had purchased the land from some of the co-sharers of the suit land and the defendant No.1-appellant had also purchased the suit land from other co-sharers, a simple suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession, without a prayer for partition, is not maintainable.

23. We have gone through the judgments of the Courts below. Admittedly, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 purchased the land through registered deed No.4835 dated 15.05.1991, mutated her name, and has been regularly paying rent to the government and the defendant No.1-appellant purchased the land six years after the said purchase by the plaintiff-respondent No.1 and thereafter took possession of the suit land.

24. After perusal of the evidence on record, it also appears that in both registered deeds, the boundaries have been specifically mentioned, and the defendant No.1-appellant took possession of the said portion of land 6 (six) years after the date of purchase by the plaintiff-respondent No.1. In the deed of the plaintiff-respondent No.1 the boundary of the suit land has been mentioned as under:-
" :- :   :      :           "

25. And in the deed of the defendant No.1-appellant the specific boundary has been mentioned as under:
"  :     :      :        :         :    "

26. In view of the above, it appears that the Trial Court, after elaborate discussion and consideration of the evidence on record, took view that the boundaries in both deeds are similar. Admittedly, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 purchased the land and possessed the same by mutating her name. However, six years after the said purchase by the plaintiff-respondent No.1, the defendant No.1-appellant purchased the land and took possession of the said portion. In such circumstances, it cannot be said that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 failed to prove her case of possession and dispossession.

27. The Appellate Court below, although, opined that the suit was not maintainable as the suit land was ejmali and had not been partitioned, failed to consider that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 had purchased the land six years prior to the defendant No.1-appellant and had been in possession of it, having mutated her name and paid rent to the government. Thus, in view of the above, it appears that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 has title over the suit land. It also appears from the judgment of the Trial Court, the evidence on record as well as the documents produced by the plaintiff-respondent No.1, that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 was in possession of the suit land and was forcefully dispossessed therefrom, and thus filed the suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession, which is quite maintainable in the eye of law.

28. However, in a suit for recovery of possession, the plaintiff must first prove possession and then dispossession. It appears that, in the instant suit, the plaintiff-respondent No.1 succeeded in proving her title and that she was forcefully dispossessed from the suit land by the defendant No.1-appellant. It is also the finding of the Trial Court that the plaintiff-respondent No.1 successfully proved her title and that the defendant No.1-appellant took possession of the said land six years after the plaintiff-respondent No.1 had purchased it. In such a case, there is no bar to file a suit for declaration of title and recovery of khas possession alone, and a prayer for partition is not required.

29. However, since the defendant No.1-appellant is a subsequent purchaser, he had no option but to establish his right by filing a suit for partition, whereas the plaintiff-respondent No.1 has no such obligation.

30. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, and in view of the foregoing discussions, it is our considered view that the High Court Division, upon proper consideration of the evidence on record, rightly set aside the judgment and decree dated 03.03.2008 passed by the learned Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Noakhali, and correctly restored the judgment and decree of the Trial Court.

31. In light of the above, we find no merit in the appeal. Accordingly, the Civil Appeal No.726 of 2016 is hereby dismissed.
===End===

===20SCOBAD68===

APPELLATE DIVISION

Present:
Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam
Mr. Justice S.M. Emdadul Hoque
Mr. Justice A.K.M. Asaduzzaman

CIVIL APPEAL No. 305 OF 2017
(From the judgment and decree dated 06.05.2015 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No.4050 of 2013)

Md. Obaidul Islam and others
-Versus-
Md. Abdul Mazid Mondal and others

For the Appellants: Mr. Md. Ashraf Ali, Advocate instructed by Md. Shafiqul Islam Chowdhury, Advocate-on-Record.
For the Respondents: Mr. Zainul Abedin, Senior Adv. with Mr. B.M. Elias, Adv. instructed by Mr. Mohammad Abdul Hai, Mr. Md. Shahidul Islam, Advocate-on-Record.

Date of Hearing and Judgment: 23-04-2025

JUDGMENT

A.K.M. Asaduzzaman, J:

1. This civil petition for leave to appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated 06.05.2015 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 4050 of 2013 affirming those dated 10.10.2013 passed by the learned Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Jashore in Title Appeal No. 02 of 2013 reversing those dated 07.01.2013 passed by the Senior Assistant Judge, Chowgacha, Jashore in Title Suit No. 23 of 2005 dismissing the suit.

2. Facts relevant for disposal of this matter in brief, are that Respondent Nos. 1-9 as plaintiffs instituted Title Suit No. 23 of 2005 before the Court of Assistant Judge, Chowgacha, Jashore against the petitioners praying for a declaration that the letter dated 21.03.2005 passed by the Senior Assistant secretary, Ministry of Rural Development and Co-operative is illegal, created, void ab-intio is liable to be cancelled.

3. Plaint Case in short inter alia is that, letter dated 21.03.2013 for site selection of Pashapol Union Parishad Complex building at Pashapol is illegal, Collusive, ultravires, invalid etc. setting up a plea in the plaint that government at any point of time recognized the old site for Pashapol Union Parishad Office is at Bariali Mouza at Kha Schedule land of the plaint where all the requirements for construction of the Union Parishad Complex building though available has been illegally ignored by the government and the government proposed site of the land of the construction of Pashapol Union Parishad Complex Building site having defective title and want of contiguity and less than the required area and is not having any contiguous market, school and want of communication network with the majority villages peoples support of Pashapol Union Parishad for which plaintiff appellant opposite party Nos. 1-9 in a representative character suit and hence they filed this suit.

4. Defendant Nos. 1/12-16, 2-5/18 and 6-11 filed separate written statements and defendant Nos. 6-11 supported the statements of the defendant Nos. 1/12-16 denying all the material allegations made in the plaint stating inter alia that the suit is barred by limitation, defect of parties. The government has approved to establish the Union Parishad Complex at ga scheduled land. The Union Council earlier took initiative to establish the complex in the year 1976 at first. But the Union Parishad Chairman ignoring the said initiative most arbitrarily established the complex at the very north side of the union in the year 1977. Pashapol Mouza is at the centre of the union and the communication is good. There is a Hut, High School, Health complex, mosque, primary school is situated at this place. Almost 12618 inhabitants out of 17719 inhabitants of the said union live in surrounding villages of Pashapol. Therefore it is suitable place to construct Union Parishad Complex. Hence the suit is liable to be dismissed.

5. Trial Court after considering the evidence and hearing the parties dismissed the suit by its judgment and decree date 07.01.2013.

6. Being aggrieved there against plaintiffs preferred Title Appeal No. 02 of 2013 before the Court of District Judge, Jashore, which was heard on transfer by the Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Jashore, who by the impugned judgment and decree dated 10.10.2013 allowed the appeal and after reversing the judgment of the trial court decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiffs.

7. Challenging the said judgment and decree defendant-petitioners preferred Civil Revision No. 4050 of 2013 before the Hon'ble High Court Division. By the impugned judgment and decree dated 06.05.2015 Hon'ble High Court Division discharged the rule and affirmed the judgment of the Appellate Court.

8. Challenging the said judgment and decree of the Hon'ble High Court Division, the instant leave petition was preferred and leave was granted on the following grounds.

1. Because the Apex Court of the country has already decided that the selection of site of Union Parishad is the business of the Government and relates to Policy matter connecting the administration and as such the plaintiffs has no locus standi to challenge such policy decision of the government and as such the present suit of the plaintiffs is not at all maintainable. But the honorable High Court Division and the Appellate Court has failed to appreciate the settled principle of law and most illegally decreed the suit and as such the judgment and decree passed by the High Court Division is liable to be interfered with.

and

2. Because the subject matter of the suit is shifting of site of Pashapol Union Parishad from mouza Bariali to mouza Pashapol. Plaintiffs filed the instant suit on representative capacity for a declaration that the order dated 21.03.2005 passed by the Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operative is illegal, collusive without authority. From the evidence it appears that the said decision was taken after observing all legal formalities. Instant suit is not maintainable under section 42 of the Specific Relief as the plaintiff has no right to any legal character or to any property. Moreover, the site selection is the business of the Government relating to policy matter and as such the plaintiff had no locus standi to file the suit and as such the judgment and decree passed by the High Court Division is liable to be interfered with.

9. Mr. Md. Ashraf Ali, the learned Advocate appearing for the petitioners submits that the Apex Court of the country has already decided that the selection of site of Union Parishad is the business of the government and relates to policy matters concerning the administration, and as such the plaintiffs have no locus standi to challenge such policy decision of the government, hence the present suit of the plaintiff is not at all maintainable. But the High Court Division and the Appellate Court have failed to appreciate the settled principle of law and most erroneously decreed the suit, as such the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division calls for interference by this division. He further submits that the subject matter of the suit is shifting of site of Pashapol Union Parishad from Mouza Bariali to Mouza Pashapol. The plaintiffs filed the instant suit in representative capacity for a declaration that the order dated 21.03.2005 passed by the Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Co-operative is illegal, collusive and without authority. From the evidence it appears that the said decision was taken after observing all legal formalities. The instant suit is not maintainable under section 42 of the Specific Relief Act as the plaintiff has no right to any legal character or to any property. Moreover, the site selection is the business of the government concerning policy matters, and as such the plaintiffs had no locus standi to file the suit, and as such the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division calls for interference by this Division.

10. Mr. B.M. Elias, the learned Advocate appearing for the respondents opposes the submission made by the petitioners and the grounds taken in the petitioners and submits that for selection the site by the government specific guide lines were given by the circular dated 28.12.2005 issued by the Ministry of Local Government Rural Development and Co-operative, Government of Bangladesh vide its memo no. //// (). But those guidelines has not at all been followed in issuing the memo is dispute as such the same is illegal as it found by the appellate Court in passing the impugned judgment find no illegality in the impugned judgment and decree passed by the appellate court that the aforesaid findings of the Hon'ble High Court Division are the concernment finding of facts based on the material evidence on record and as such Hon'ble High Court Division discharge the rule on merit and he submits that as per said circular the authority should select the site of the Union Parishad Complex and for such selection there is none but he council or parishad of the Union should take the decision at first. Such decision about selection by the council should be taken in a meeting of the council (parishad) but in the instant case any resolution of the council (parishad) took decision to establish their office in their own land and such fact was also reported by the Upazilla Nirbahi Officer such report is exhibited as exhibit 5 in the trial court. The Deputy Commissioner also made some recommendation (exhibit-6) but without following such decision of the council (parishad) subsequent recommendation by the Upazilla Nirbahi Officer and Deputy Commissioner without any reason of shifting for the office or complex of the Union Parishad from its own land to another land was made that the High Court Division further found that but in the instant case it appears that the guideline provided in that circular or the decision of the Union Parishad has not been followed that the judgment of High court Division is based on the material evidence on record.

11. He further submits that the civil court is always competent to examine the legality and illegality in issuing impugned letter dated 21.03.2005 issued by the Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Local Government Rural development and Co-operative, Government of Bangladesh regarding administrative approval and as such suit was not barred by any law. He further submits that civil court is always competent to examine the legality and illegality in issuing impugned letter dated 21.03.2005 issued by the Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Local Government Rural Development and Co-operative, Government of Bangladesh regarding administrative approval and as such suit was not barred by any law. He further submits that the impugned letter dated 21.03.2005 was illegal collusive ineffective and void so the plaintiffs have got locus standi to challenge the illegality and as such suit was quite maintainable.

12. Admittedly the Union Parishad named Pashapol under P.S.- Chowgacha, District-Jashore composed of 17 villages named Bariali, Howli, Duriali, Maligati, Surewsharkati, Raniali, Kaliakunid, Palua, Borogobindapur, Gopinathpur, Bil Erol, Burulia, Dosh Pakia, Pashapol, Raghunathpur, Barsha Ranga and Banbahuda. Plaintiffs are inhabitants of 10 villages out of those 17 villages. Since long before the office of Pashapol Union Parishad is running on 65 decimals of land belonged to said Parishad appertains to Plot Nos. 2426 and 2427, 2466 and 2467 of mouza Bariali. On 05.01.1977 by executing a registered deed of gift Sree Upendra Nath Mondal, Sree Ajit Kumar Mondal and Sree Pagol Chandra Mondal of village- Bariali donated the said land for the office of the said union parishad where in the said union parishad building was established. Deputy Commissioner, Jashore by memo dated 09.12.2004 sent a report with recommendation to construct the Union Parishad Complex in Mouza Pashapol, in the same report, he proposed a different land measuring 51.75 acres in Mouza Pashapol and mentioned that the chairman of the Union Parishad and its 08 members were in favour of constructing the complex in Pashapol but infact such report is false and baseless and challenging the said report and subsequently proceedings and the administrative approval of the Senior Assistant Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and co-operative for construction of the said Union parishad complex in aforementioned newly proposed land in Mouza-Pashapol and hence plaintiffs filed the instant suit.

13. Trial Court while deciding the suit although upon considering the circular dated 18.12.2005 regarding selection land as well as referring to decision of the Appellate Division in the case of Md. Abdul Motaleb Sarker and others Vs. Md. Laskar Ali and others reported in 15MLR(AD)2010 page 231 found that "The site selection is the business of the Government and relates to policy matter concerning the administration and the petitioner as plaintiff had no locus standi to challenge such a policy decision of the Government."

14. Upon going through the fact of this case, together with the judgment cited by the trial court, which was not properly been addressed by the Apex Court, We are of the view that the petitioner-plaintiffs had no locus standi to challenge the policy making power of the government in any way. The shifting of site of the Union Parishad is a policy matter of the government as well as administrative decision, Plaintiff individual had no locus standi to challenge the same. The High Court Division as well as the Appellate Court by deciding the matter and considering the same, passed the impugned judgment arbitrarily.

15. In view of the above discussion, We thus find substance in the appeal. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and decree passed by the High Court Division and Appellate Court are hereby set aside and the judgment of the Senior Assistant Judge is restored and the suit is dismissed, however, without any order as to costs.

16. Communicate the judgment at once.
===End===

===20SCOBAD73===

APPELLATE DIVISION

Present:
Mr. Justice Zubayer Rahman Chowdhury
Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Haque
Mrs. Justice Farah Mahbub

CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 171-174 OF 2015.
(From the judgment and order dated 13.02.2014 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos.766, 803, 1242 and 1478 all of 2012).

Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong
... Appellant (In all the cases)

-Versus-

Interbulk Overseas SA Bangladesh Limited and another
... Respondents (In C.A. No. 171/15)

A. K. Khan and Company Limited, represented by its Managing Director and others
... Respondents (In C.A. No. 172/15)

East West Property Development (Pvt.) and others
... Respondents (In C.A. No. 173/15)

Bashundhara Industrial Complex Limited and another
... Respondents (In C.A. No. 174/15)

For the Appellants (In all the cases): 
Mr. Md. Asaduzzaman, Attorney General with Mr. Aneek R. Hoque, Additional Attorney General instructed by Ms. Nahid Sultana, Advocate-on-Record.

For the Respondent No. 1 (In C.A. No. 171/15): 
Ms. Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent Nos. 2-16 (In C.A. No. 171/15): 
Not represented.

For the Respondent No. 1 (In C.A. No. 172/15): 
Mr. Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent Nos. 2-8 (In C.A. No. 172/15): 
Not represented.

For the Respondent No. 1 (In C.A. No. 173/15): 
Mr. Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record.

For Respondent Nos. 2-3 (In C.A. No. 173/15): 
Not represented.

For the Respondent No. 1 (In C.A. No. 174/15): 
Mr. Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record.

For the Respondent No. 2 (In C.A. No. 174/15): 
Not represented.

Date of Hearing : 20 & 21-05-2025
Date of Judgment : 21-05-2025

JUDGMENT

Farah Mahbub, J:

1. Since common question of law and similar facts are involved in all those 4(four) civil appeals, as such, those have been heard together and are being disposed of by this single judgment.

2. These civil appeals by leave are directed against the judgment and order dated 13.02.2014 passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition Nos.766, 803, 1242 and 1478 all of 2012 making the Rule absolute with necessary directions.

3. Facts, in connection with Civil Appeal No.171 of 2015 arising out of Writ Petition No.766 of 2012, in brief, are that pursuant to long term Settlement Case No.1/92-93 the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong executed a registered deed dated 21.03.1994 in favour of the respondent-writ petitioner for 99 years covering an area of 19.29 acres corresponding to B.S. Dag No.1, Mouja-Majherchar, Police Station-Anwara, District-Chittagong. Accordingly, Mutation Case No.1099/2009-2010 was opened in the name of the writ-petitioner, who, upon paying land development tax, had been enjoying possession thereof without any objection from any quarter whatsoever.

4. Meanwhile, Land Acquisition Case No. 1/2010-2011 was initiated by the authority concerned to acquire 144.05 acres of land of Rangadia Mouja and 451.31 acres of land situated under Majherchar Mouja including the land of the writ-petitioner with publication of notice under Section 3 of the Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982(in short, the Ordinance, 1982). The writ-petitioner duly raised objection thereto vide letter dated 19.08.2010. In this regard, their categorical assertion is that neither they were heard nor their objection was disposed of.

5. Further assertion of the writ-petitioner is that when the proposal with concise report dated 02.11.2011 was placed before the Hon'ble Prime Minister of the Republic for final approval, in view of Section 5(1) of the Ordinance, 1982, it was sent back to the Ministry concerned on 14.11.2010 with the following remarks: ",  /     -        

6. However, the emphatic claim of the respondent-writ petitioner is that the Ministry of Land never submitted any concise report or fresh summary in compliance of the said direction. Rather, without obtaining approval of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Land, vide the impugned Memo bearing No. / -//-/- dated 23.11.2010, gave final approval on behalf of the appellant-respondent government to acquire 07.60 acres of private land and to transfer 587.60 acres of "khas" land under clause 7 of the Land Acquisition Manual, 1997 for construction of coal based power plant jetty and cold storage yard with direction upon the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong (now, Chattogram) to take necessary steps in due compliance of law.

7. Being aggrieved thereby led to filing the writ petition before the High Court Division under Article 102 of Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, whereupon a Rule Nisi was issued.

8. Short facts in relation to Civil Appeal No.172 of 2015 arising out of Writ Petition No. 803 of 2012 are that the appellant-respondent Government, vide registered lease deed No.1817 of 1961, leased out 109.71 acres of land under R.S. Dag Nos.241/3C,241/2C,241/4C,241/9C,241/7A,241/6A,241/5A,241/10A corresponding to B.S. Khatian No.154, B.S. Dag Nos. 1001-1025, 1086-1096, 1100-1101, 1104-1117, 1120-1121, 1126-1128, 1136-1139, Mouja-Rangadia, Police Station-Kornophully, District-Chittagong and 75 acres of land under R.S. Dag No.1/A corresponding to B.S. Khatian No.3, B.S. Dag No.1, Mouja-Majherchar, Police Station-Kornophully, District-Chittagong, in total 184.71 acres of land in favour of the respondent-writ petitioner for 25 (twenty five) years, with possession thereof. Said lease period was subsequently renewed for another 25 (twenty five) years vide registered Renewal Deed No.1769 dated 29.03.2009.

9. While the respondent-writ petitioner was enjoying possession of the said properties upon paying due land development tax as was required under the law, notice under Section 3 of the Ordinance, 1982 was issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong in connection with L.A. Case No. 1/2010-2011. The respondent-writ petitioner raised objection thereto on 09.08.2010 and again, on 22.08.2010 respectively; those were duly received by the authority concerned.

10. It is also the categorical assertion of the respondent-writ petitioner that despite the fact that the appellant-writ respondent No.2 was not empowered to reject the objection of the writ petitioner he, upon rejecting the said objection, sent a report to the Ministry of Land for approval. On receipt thereof, said Ministry prepared a summary for the Hon'ble Prime Minister for approval vide Memo No. / -//-/- dated 02.11.2010, but without including the objection being raised by the respondent-writ petitioner. The then Prime Minister of the Republic, not being satisfied with the said concise report, sent it back to the Ministry concerned vide note dated 14.11.2010 with direction to submit a new summary with necessary clarification. But without sending report afresh, the Ministry of Land issued the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010.

11. On the contention that the initiation and continuation of the said L.A. proceeding was illegal and hence, it was liable to be declared to have been issued without lawful authority and of no legal effect, the respondent-writ petitioner filed writ petition before the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution. Having found prima-facie substance, a Rule Nisi was issued by the said Division.

12. Short facts in connection with Civil Appeal No.173 of 2015 arising out of Writ Petition No.1242 of 2012, are that writ-respondent No.1, i.e. Chittagong Port Authority leased out 264 acres of land of B.S. Plot No.101, 1(p), 114(p), Mouja-Majherchar, P.S.-Karnaphuli (Bandar), Upzilla-Anwara, District-Chittagong in favour of the respondent-writ petitioner on execution of a lease agreement dated 04.05.2006 for the purpose of Container Freight Station (CFS), Inland Container Depot (ICD), Supply Based Station (SBS), port based and also, port and shipping related industries. While the writ petitioner was enjoying possession thereof on payment of Tk.47 crores as rent on account of the lease agreement, respective notices were issued upon it by the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong under Section 3 of the Ordinance, 1982 in connection with L.A. Case No.1/2010-2011 for acquisition of the properties including the properties of the writ petitioner.

13. Challenging the proceedings of the said L.A. Case, the respondent-writ petitioner instituted Other Suit No.130 of 2011 before the Court of First Joint District Judge, Chittagong. During pendency of the said suit, the Ministry of Land issued the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 with direction upon the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong to transfer the case property of the writ petitioner in favour of the requiring body, treating the properties as "khas" land. In the given context, allowing the prayer of the respondent-writ petitioner, the concerned Court below dismissed the suit for non-prosecution vide order dated 03.04.2012.

14. At the same, challenging the impugned memo dated 23.11.2010, issued by the Ministry of Land, the writ petitioner filed Writ Petition No.1242 of 2012 before the High Court Division under Article 102 of the Constitution on the contention that the case property belonged to Chittagong Port Authority and that those were not acquired by the authority concerned in connection with L.A. Case No.1 of 2010-2011.As such, giving direction upon the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong to transfer the case land in favour of the requiring body under Article 7 of the Land Acquisition Manual, 1997 was unlawful.

15. The writ petitioner also relied upon the Note dated 14.11.2010, claiming to have been signed by the then Hon'ble Prime Minister of the Republic in order to challenge the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 issued by the Ministry concerned.

16. Having found prima-facie substance a Rule Nisi was issued.

17. Brief facts in connection with Civil Appeal No.174 of 2015 arising out of Writ Petition No.1478 of 2012, are that the respondent-writ petitioner is the owner of 0.66 acre of land in connection with B.S. Plot No.1144, 0.18 acre of B.S. Plot No.1145, 0.47 acre of B.S. Plot No.1146, 0.77 acre of B.S. Plot No.1147, 1.70 acre of B.S. Plot No.1148, 3.12 acres of B.S. Plot Nos.1149, 1152 and 1153, B.S. Khatian No.33, corresponding to R.S. Khatian No.12, R.S. Plot No.56, P.S. Plot No.429, J.L. No. P.S. 5, B.S. 31 of Rangadia Mouja, Union- Boyrag, Upozilla-Anwara, at present-Karnafuly, District-Chittagong.

18. While the respondent-writ petitioner was enjoying possession thereof on payment of land development tax regularly in due compliance of law, a notice was issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong under Section 3 of the Ordinance, 1982 for acquisition of properties including the properties of the writ petitioner in connection with L.A. Case No.1 of 2010-2011. Pursuant to the said notice, the writ petitioner duly raised objection, which was ultimately rejected by the authority concerned. Accordingly, the Ministry of Land prepared a concise report dated 02.11.2010 for placing the same before the then Hon'ble Prime Minister for her approval. Relying upon the Note dated 14.11.2010 their further claim was that pursuant thereto the then Hon'ble Prime Minister gave direction upon the Ministry concerned to submit concise report afresh, which was not complied with.

19. At this juncture, challenging the proceeding of L.A. Case No.1 of 2010-2011 the respondent-writ petitioner as plaintiff instituted Other Suit No.130 of 2011 before the Court of First Joint District Judge, Chittagong. Subsequently, the writ-petitioner having come to learn as to issuance of notice under Section 6 of the Ordinance vide Memo dated 31.01.2012 for taking possession of the case land, made a prayer before the concerned court below to dismiss the suit for non-prosecution, which was duly allowed vide order dated 03.04.2012.

20. In the given facts and circumstances, the respondent-writ petitioner filed Writ Petition No.1478 of 2012 before the High Court Division upon the contention that without execution of any agreement with the requiring body, the L.A. proceeding was without jurisdiction. Their further claim was that the then Hon'ble Prime Minister never approved acquisition of the case land in connection with the said L.A. Case. Hence, the impugned proceeding was liable to be declared unlawful.

21. Having found prima-facie substance a Rule Nisi was accordingly issued.

22. All those Rules Nisi, except the Rule in connection with Writ Petition No.1478 of 2012, were contested by the appellant-writ respondent, Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong by filing separate sets of affidavits-in-opposition, stating, inter-alia, that the whole process of L.A. Case No. 1 of 2010-2011 was initiated in due compliance of law upon providing opportunities to the respective respondents-writ petitioners of being heard. Also, upon taking due approval of the Government under Section 5(1) of the Ordinance, 1982, the impugned Memo dated 23.10.2010 was issued with a direction upon the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong to take necessary steps in due compliance of law.

23. Upon hearing the respective contending parties, the High Court Division, vide judgment and order dated 13.02.2014, disposed of all the 4(four) writ petitions making the Rules absolute upon declaring the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 to have been issued without lawful authority and hence, of no legal effect, with the following observations and findings:

"Therefore, if a land is vested in the Government, the said land ipso facto does not become the property of a statutory corporation or a local authority, unless the Government transfers the said land to the said statutory corporation such as PDB and PDB has also to acquire such land in compliance of provision of section 3 of the said Order of 1972. Therefore, in our view, since PDB ipso facto shall not become owner of the land when it vests in the Government, and since PDB is though a Governmental authority in nature, but is not Government unto itself, further action on behalf of the Government is required to transfer the land to PDB....... Therefore, PDB shall not become owner of the land unless the same is transferred to PDB by Government under section 15(2) of the said Ordinance and for this reason section 15(1) of the said Ordinance has to be complied with by way of executing a prior agreement between PDB and the Government.

24. Apart from this, another aspect that calls for consideration is that the Ministry of Land submitted a summary dated 02.11.2010 before the Hon'ble Prime Minister of the Republic. But the Hon'ble Prime Minister vide note dated 14.11.2010 directed the Ministry of Republic to submit a new summary afresh.

25. We do not find anything which shows the Ministry of Land to comply with the direction of the Prime Minister made in note dated 14.11.2010. The contesting respondent stated in respect of the said note dated 14.11.2010 that it is unaware of any omission of the Government in this respect. The Ministry of Land did not file any affidavit-in-opposition. Therefore, the said note dated 14.11.2010 leads us to irresistible conclusion that the Prime Minister never had the opportunity to approve the said acquisition of land in the said L/A case.

26. It is also pertinent to mention that Memo No. /-/  ()-15/2002/378(64) dated 01.09.2002 issued by the Ministry of Land itself clarifies that if the proposed acquisition exceeds 50 standard bighas, the approval of the Prime Minister shall be required.

27. Therefore, we are of the view that even if only 7.86 acres of land has been directed to be acquired by the Ministry of Land, but since the land required for the whole project of PDB exceeds 50 standard bighas of land, the approval of the Hon'ble Prime Minister is required and in the cases in hand, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the Prime Minister had never had the opportunity to ponder over such approval as Ministry of Land did never submit a new summary as directed by Hon'ble Prime Minister vide note dated 14.11.2010. The action of Ministry of Land in issuing the said memo dated 23.11.2010 directing the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong to acquire the said 7.86 acres of land and to transfer rest of the land to the requiring body instead of complying with the direction of Hon'ble Prime Minister to submit fresh summary is an outright deviation from direction of Hon'ble Prime Minister which is absolutely unconstitutional being flagrant violation of authority of the Hon'ble Prime Minister under Article 55(2) of the Constitution.

28. the action of the Ministry of Land in the said impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 is absolutely malafide and such malafide action goes to the root of the jurisdiction and hence the same is without jurisdiction. Further, the whole L/A proceeding being a nullity, the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 issued and all further actions pursuant to the said L/A proceeding is also a nullity"

29. Being aggrieved, the writ-respondent No.1, the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong, as petitioner, preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal bearing Nos. 1869, 1870, 1871, and 1872 all of 2014 before this Division under Article 103 of the Constitution.

30. After hearing the parties concerned, leave was granted by this Division in all the civil petitions vide order dated 26.02.2015 on 4(four) counts. However, the following, being relevant, is quoted below:

II. Because, the High Court Division committed an error in relying upon an alleged letter dated 08.11.2010 showing further clarification which was allegedly sought from the office of the Prime Minister to the Ministry of Land without asking the Government to produce the relevant file; however, had the original file been called for, it would have had appeared that there was no existence of any alleged letter which was produced by the writ petitioner and it was nothing but a concocted one; as such, interference by this Division is called for.
Consequent thereto instant civil appeals arose.

31. Mr. Md. Assaduzzaman, the learned Attorney General appearing with Mr. Annek R. Hoque, the learned Additional Attorney General for the appellant categorically submits that in order to seek equitable relief under Article 102 of the Constitution, the foremost important principle which an aggrieved person is required to follow is to invoke writ jurisdiction with clean hand. If any question arises on that count, it shall be considered as a disentitling factor to grant relief, as prayed for.

32. In the instant case, he submits, the cardinal assertions of the respondents-writ petitioners, among others, are that pursuant to Note no.4 dated 14.11.2010, necessary direction was given by the then Hon'ble Prime Minister of the Republic upon the Ministry of Land to furnish a fresh concise report in view of incomplete information as to disposal of objections being raised by the parties concerned, but that writ-respondent no.1 never sent fresh concise report. Ultimately, without taking approval of the then Hon'ble Prime Minister, the appellant-writ respondent no.1,vide the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010, directed writ-respondent no.2 to take necessary steps in connection with the properties in question in due compliance of law.

33. Said assertion of the respondents-writ petitioners, he submits, are incorrect, for, Note no.4 containing the signature of the then Hon'ble Prime Minister seeking further clarification from the concerned Ministry, as reproduced and quoted in the writ petitions, are non-existent; hence, those are the product of concoction/forgery.

34. In this regard, he also goes to argue that had the original file been called for, it would have appeared before the High Court Division that there was no existence of the alleged letter/note dated 08.11.2010 in the respective record. The High Court Division, however, basing on the said non-existent letter, categorically found that the Ministry of Land never sent any report, as required by the then Hon'ble Prime Minister and suppressing the said fact, had issued the impugned memo dated 23.11.2010. Ultimately, the respective Rules were made absolute terming the action of the Ministry concerned mala fide with declaration that the whole process of L.A. Case No.1 of 2010-2011 is without jurisdiction.

35. In the given facts and circumstances, he submits, the impugned judgment and order 13.02.2014 passed by the High Court Division in all the 4 (four) writ petitions is liable to be knocked down for being based on forged documents.

36. No one appears on behalf of the respondents-writ petitioners to contest the instant appeals.

37. The obligations of a litigant while approaching the Court for redressal of his grievances must be with "clean hands". Courts have, over the centuries, frowned upon litigants who, with intent to deceive and mislead the Courts, initiated proceeding without full disclosure of facts and came to the Courts with "unclean hands". Courts have held that such litigants are neither entitled to be heard on merit nor are entitled to any relief, interim or final: Kishore Samrite -Vs-State of U.P. (2013) 2 SCC 398.

38. In the instant case, the respondents-writ petitioners, while challenging the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010, issued by the Ministry of Land under Section 5(1) of the Ordinance, 1982, have admittedly based their foundation on the note dated 14.11.2010, as quoted/reproduced in the respective writ petitions, on the contention that the then Hon'ble Prime Minister, vide the said note dated 14.11.2010, directed the Ministry concerned to submit a summary afresh. However, the said Ministry, without complying said direction, i.e. without sending the said summary afresh, had approved the acquisition process with direction upon the concerned Deputy Commissioner to take steps for transferring the properties in question to the requiring body.

39. It appears from record that the Ministry of Land did not enter appearance in the respective writ petitions to contest the Rules Nisi. The Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong, however, contested the Rules by filing separate sets of affidavit-in-opposition stating, inter-alia, that "the concise report dated 02.11.2010 of the Ministry of Land, as quoted in paragraph-23, is matter of record (paragraph 18 of affidavit-in-opposition dated 15.04.2012). The contents of note of Prime Minister dated 14.11.2010 directing the Ministry of Land by the Prime Minister to submit further concise report, as quoted in paragraph No.24 of the writ petition, are also matter of records. The Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong merely acted as per final orders and instructions of Government based on the impugned Memo No. / -/  -/- dated 23.11.2010 issued by the Ministry of Land and the Deputy Commissioner, Chittagong is unaware of any act of omission committed by Ministry of Land in issuing the said impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010, the contents of which are matters of record (paragraph No.20 of affidavit-in-opposition dated 15.04.2012 and Annexure-5 of the affidavit-in-opposition dated 15.04.2012)."

40. Taking cognizance of Note no.4 dated 14.11.2010 and also, of the assertions of the respondents-writ petitioners that the Ministry concerned approved the acquisition process vide Memo dated 23.11.2010 without sending summary afresh in compliance of the direction of the Hon'ble Prime Minister, the High Court Division categorically found the action of the said Ministry to be malafide and hence, without jurisdiction.

41. During the course of hearing of the instant Civil Appeals, the categorical contention of the appellant-writ respondent has been that in the original file of the concerned Ministry, there is no existence of the alleged letter/note dated 14.11.2010, which was reproduced/quoted in the respective writ petitions and that respondents-writ petitioners have obtained the relief in the High Court Division exercising fraud upon the Court; hence, the impugned judgment and order dated 13.02.2014 passed by the High Court Division is liable to be struck down.

42. This Division, however, finds substance to the said contention in view of the fact that in para 23 of Writ Petition No.766 of 2012, the respondent-writ petitioner has quoted/reproduced the summary dated 02.11.2010 prepared for the then Hon'ble Prime Minister of the Republic, a confidential document, without disclosing as to how they managed to obtain the same and for using them in a court proceeding without being duly authorised, is a punishable offence under the Official Secret Act, 1923.

43. It is surprising to note that during the course of hearing of the Rules before the High Court Division, neither the Ministry of Land as writ respondent No.1 entered appearance to contest the Rules to clarify the veracity of the said contents nor the appellant-writ respondent No.2 raised any objection whatsoever to the same. Rather, in their affidavits-in-opposition, they discharged their duties negligently by merely stating that the summary note dated 08.11.2010, as reproduced in para24 of Writ Petition No.766 of 2012, are matters of record.

44. In the given facts and circumstances, the said stand of the appellant-writ respondent No.2 is unfortunate, unacceptable and hence, strongly deprecated.

45. However, fact remains, after granting leave by this Division vide order dated 26.02.2015, in particular on ground No. II, corresponding to Note no.4 dated 14.11.2010, the respondent-writ petitioners, in their concise statements, could not controvert the assertion of the appellant-writ respondent No.1 that there is no existence of the alleged note/letter dated 08.11.2010, which was reproduced by the respondents-writ petitioners.

46. In the given facts and circumstances, the contents of the summary dated 08.11.2010, as reproduced in the respective writ petitions, showing endorsement of the signature of the then Hon'ble Prime Minister dated 14.11.2010, is found to be fictitious and a non-existent letter.

47. In Lazarus Estate Ltd. Vs. Beasley, (1956) 1 QB 702 PP. 712 and 713, Lord Denning observed:
"No judgment of a Court, no order of a Minister can be allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud. Fraud unravels everything."

48. In the same judgment, Lord Parker L.J. observed that:
"Fraud vitiates all transactions known to the law of however high a degree of solemnity."

49. The High Court Division, while declaring the entire proceedings of L.A. Case No.1/2010-2011 including the impugned Memo dated 23.11.2010 issued by the Ministry of Land as being unlawful, malafide and without jurisdiction, took cognizance of the said fictitious and non-existent note/concise report dated 08.11.2010. Resultantly, the entire judgment and order dated 13.02.2014 by the High Court Division is vitiated with fraud and the same is, accordingly, struck down.

50. In the result, all the civil appeals bearing Nos. 171-174 of 2015 are hereby allowed.
===End===

===20SCOBAD83===
APPELLATE DIVISION

Present:
Mr. Justice Syed Refaat Ahmed, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Md. Ashfaqul Islam
Mr. Justice Syed Md. Ziaul Karim
Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Haque
Mr. Justice S.M. Emdadul Hoque

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.61 OF 2017.
(arising out of Criminal Petition for leave to Appeal No. 546 of 2016)
(From the judgment and order dated 17.09.2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No. 7435 of 2010).

Md. Humayun Kabir
-Versus-
The State

For the Appellant: Mr. Ruhul Quddus, Senior Advocate instructed by Mr. Md. Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record.
For the Respondent: Mr. Aneek-R. Hoque, Additional Attorney General with Mr. Zahirul Islam Sumon, Deputy Attorney General instructed by Ms. Shirin Afroz, Advocate-on-Record.

Date of Hearing: 27-08-2024 & 28-08-2024
Date of Judgment: 30-10-2024

JUDGMENT

Syed Md. Ziaul Karim, J:

1. By this Criminal Appeal the convict-appellant has challenged the legality and propriety of the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 17.09.2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.7435 of 2010 (heard along with Death Reference No. 66 of 2010 and Jail Appeal No.369 of 2010) rejecting the death reference and partly allowing both the appeals by commuting the sentence of death to one imprisonment for life and also to pay fine of Tk.20,000/- in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 2 (two) years. By the same judgment other 2(two) co-accused were acquitted by the learned Judge of the trial Court.

2. The prosecution case as projected in the First Information Report (briefly as FIR) and unfurled at the trial are that on 06.03.2009 approximately at 11.00 p.m. Md. Asaduzzaman Sonju who was the Security Operator in Civil Aviation Department was sitting with his 3 (three) other friends namely, Md. Humayun Kabir, Md. Zulhas Mia and Md. Fazlu Mia in front of his father's (the informant) shop at Kaola Civil Aviation Welfare Market. At one stage of their altercation the appellant Humayun Kabir fired at him from his pistol. Thereafter, the appellant along with the other accused departed from the scene. The incident was informed by Nilufar Azad (P.W-17) to her father Mohammad Ali (the informant and P.W-1) at 11.15 p.m. The informant was the Security Supervisor in Civil Aviation Department and he was on duty. Upon being so informed of the incident he along with his two colleagues namely, Md. Sowkat Ali (P.W-14) and Md. Shariful Islam (P.W-13) rushed to the spot and found his son Md. Asaduzzaman Sonju in critical condition. They took him to Crescent Hospital, Uttara at 12.15 p.m. and on the way to the hospital the victim told them what had happened to him. As the physical condition of the victim became more critical he was shifted to Dhaka Medical College Hospital wherein on 07.03.2009 at 4.40 a.m. he succumbed to the injuries. The deceased had sustained multiple injuries.

3. The prosecution case was launched by lodging an F.I.R by Mohammad Ali (P.W-1), father of the deceased and the same was recorded as Zia International Airport Police Station Case No. 31 dated 07.03.2009 corresponding to G.R. No.227 of 2009.

4. After investigation police submitted charge sheet under sections 302, 34 of the Penal Code alleging F.I.R. named 3 (three) accused including the appellant.

5. The case was transferred to Druta Bichar Tribunal No. 4, Dhaka for trial. Thereafter, the accused were called upon to answer the charge under sections 302, 34 of the Penal Code, to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.

6. In course of trial the prosecution examined 22 witnesses out of 30 charge sheeted witnesses and the defence examined none.

7. The defence (appellant herein) case as it appears from the trend of cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses are that of innocence and false implication. It was divulged in defence that due to conflict between them over the local enmity they were falsely implicated out of vengeance.

8. After closure of the prosecution case the accused present on dock were examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and again they repeated their innocence but led no evidence in defence.

9. After trial learned Judge of the trial Court by the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 19.10.2010 convicted the appellant under section 302 of the Penal Code, and sentenced him to death by hanging. However, the learned Judge acquitted the other two co-accused namely, Md. Julhas Mia and Md. fazlu Mia holding:
(a) The prosecution successfully proved the charge of murder against the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt;
(b) The evidence regarding murder of the deceased Md. Asaduzzaman Sonjuare consistent, uniform and corroborative with each other with all material particulars. Therefore, the plea taken in defence recoils against him.

10. The matter was referred to the High Court Division for confirmation of death sentence which was recorded as Death Reference No.66 of 2010, meanwhile the appellant preferred Criminal Appeal No.7435 of 2010 and Jail Appeal No.369 of 2010 before the High Court Division. Afterwards, Criminal Appeal No.7435 of 2010 was heard alongwith Death Reference No.66 of 2010 and Jail Appeal No.369 of 2010. After hearinga Division Bench of the High Court Division by the judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 17.09.2015 rejected the Death Reference No.66 of 2010 and altered the sentence of death to one of imprisonment for life and also to pay fine of Tk.20,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years more.

11. Feeling aggrieved the appellant preferred the instant Criminal Appeal No. 61 of 2017 before this Court.

12. The learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant seeks to impeach the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence on three fold arguments:
Firstly: The High Court Division erred in law and in fact in its consideration of hearsay evidence, by failing to direct itself as to the inherent problems with hearsay evidence, the implications of the Evidence Act, and the test for reliability and probative value to weigh hearsay evidence.
Secondly: The High Court Division erred in law and in fact by failing to direct itself on the proper application for the assessment of identification of evidence, and in failing to consider and apply the relevant approach to assess the identification of evidence of prosecution witnesses.
Thirdly: The prosecution failed to produce even a single disinterested witness in this case and the witnesses produced in this case are all partisan and they cannot be believed without any suspicion and as such the conviction and sentence are liable to be set aside.

13. The learned counsel lastly submits that the judgment, and order, of conviction and sentence of the Courts below are based on misreading and non-consideration of the evidence on record and, therefore, the same cannot be sustained in the eye of law.

14. The learned Additional Attorney-General appearing on behalf of the State-respondent opposes the appeal and submits that the occurrence took place on 06.03.2009 at 11.00 p.m. and at the very earliest point of time, the deceased disclosed the name of the assailant Humayun Kabir. He adds that the charge was proved by consistent and corroborative evidence. He next submits that the appellant fired gunshot from his pistol against the deceased with the clear intention for causing death which is culpable homicide amounting to murder and the same will come within the ambit of section 300 of the Penal Code.

15. In support of his contention he refers the case of Abdul Quddus vs. The State 43 DLR (AD) 234 wherein it was held:
"The testimony of the solitary eye witness could not be shaken in any manner by the defence in cross-examination for which it is difficult to disbelief her testimony as she narrated the prosecution case in details. Even a child witness can be relied if he/she is capable of understanding and replying the question intelliquently."

16. In the case of Yogeshwar Gope vs. The State BCR 2006-267 it was held:
"(a) PWs 1-4 being father, mother and sisters of the deceased deposed before the Court and in cross-examination put to them their evidence remained unshaken and unblemish. From the evidence of aforesaid witnesses it is also proved that they established their claim of lighting kupi light and there is nothing to disbelieve them. The occurrence taking place in the house of PW.1 at about 3:00 a.m. it is not unlikely that the inmates of the house would become the natural witnesses. Only because of their relationship their evidence cannot be thrown away unless the evidence is found to be untrue or tainted with motive."

17. The learned Counsel submits that all the prosecution witnesses deposed in a very consistent manner, there were no discrepancies or contradictions in their evidence.

18. In support of his contentions he refers the case of State vs. Sree Ranjit Kumar Pramanik 45 DLR 660 held:
"When discrepancies in testimony were mere discrepancies, and not contradictions, they did not affect the truth of what was stated in Court."
He adds that in a case like this motive is immaterial.

19. In support of his contentions he refers the case of The State vs. Giasuddin and others 18 BLD-254 wherein it was held:
"When there is sufficient direct essence to prove an offence, motive is immaterial and has no vital importance. While trying a case under section 302 of the Penal Code or hearing an appeal involving Section 302, the Court must not consider first the motive of the murder, because motive is a matter of speculation, and it rests upon the mind and special knowledge of the accused persons Motive is not a necessary ingredient of an offence under section 302 of the Penal Code The Court will see if sufficient direct evidence is there or not. If not, motive may be a matter for consideration specially when the case is based on circumstantial evidence."

20. The learned Additional Attorney-General lastly submits that the learned Judge of the Court below after considering the evidence on record rightly convicted the accused which calls for no interference by this Court.

21. In order to appreciate their submissions we have gone through the record and given our anxious consideration to their submissions.

22. Let us now weigh and sift the evidence on record as adduced by the prosecution to prove the charge.

23. P.W-1 Mohammad Ali is the informant and father of the deceased Asaduzzaman @ Sonju. He is not an eye witness of the occurrence. He deposed that at the relevant time of occurrence he was on duty as Supervisor under Civil Aviation Department. During the night following 06.03.2009 from 8.00 p.m. to 7.00 a.m. he was on duty. At 11.15 p.m. on that night his daughter Nilufar Azad informed him over mobile phone that her brother Sonju was lying in front of Nilu Enterprise of Civil Aviation Market. He along with his colleagues Khandaker Sowkat Ali and Md. Shariful Islam rushed to the spot and found his son Sonju lying there in critical condition, wherein he also found other staffs namely, Khabirul Alam, Driver Iqbal, Night Guard Abdul Hamid and Abdul Wadud Khan. Then they carried the victim to the Crescent Hospital, Uttara. On the way his son Sonju disclosed that accused Kabir shot him and co-accused Julhas and Fazlu caught hold of him. Theirconversation was recorded in a cassette recorder and he gave it to the police who seized it. As Sonju's condition was very critical he was shifted to the Dhaka Medical College Hospital wherein at 4.30 a.m. he succumbed to the injuries. On the following day on 07.03.2009 the informant lodged the F.I.R which he proved as Exbt-1 with his signature appendedon it exhibited as Exbt-1/1.

24. In cross-examination he stated that among so many shops on the Airport Road the occurrence took place in front of Patowary General Stores. He asserted that accused Humayun Kabir cultivates fish in water bodies taken on lease. He contended further that there was a dispute between hisson and accused Humayun Kabir and that his son was also involved in many business in the airport area. He denied the suggestion that deceased Sonju was never in a position to disclose the name of the accused.

25. P.W-2 Md. Akter Hossain was a resident of the place of occurrencethough not an eye witness of the occurrence. He deposed that on the night following 06.03.2009 at 12.00 p.m. he heard from the informant (Mohammad Ali) that his son was shot. Then, they went to the spot wherein at 1.00/1.30 p.m. they took the victim to the Crescent Hospital, Uttara. As his condition was critical the victim was sent to the Dhaka Medical College Hospital wherein at 4.30 a.m. he succumbed to the injuries.

26. In cross-examination he denied the suggestion that the deceased was involved in car and dish business with the informant.

27. P.W-3 Syed Sajjad Hossain, P.W-4 Md. Mozibur Rahman, P.W-5 Sonjoy Ghosh are local seizure list witnesses but they did not see the occurrence. P.W-6 Md. Abdul Hannan and P.W-7 Md. Abdul Mannan carried the dead body to the morgue.

28. P.W-8 Dr. A.K.M Shafiuzzaman held post mortem examination upon the dead body of deceased Sonju and found the following injuries:
"a)Bullet wound:-Entry one entry bullet injury measuring 1/3" X 1/3" with the presence of burning, singing, blacking found in the left side of cheek which lies" above from the left angle of the mouth.
b) Exit-Exit would found right side of the upper neck size 1/3" X 1/2" which lies 2" right from back of the middle of the neck and 3 1/2" below the right mastoyed process.
c) Direction-directed oblequly forwards upwards and laterally to the right. During its Course, it has skin, soft tissues, muscles, left eygomtic, left mazila, great vesseles of the left side of the neck.
2.a) Entry one entry bullet wound size 1/3" X 1/3" with the presence of burning, singing, blacking found in the left side of the lower abdomen which 1 1/2" above from left clearal chest 2 1/2" left from midline and
b. Exit-One exit would found in the middle of right ghetal region in the presence of burning, singing, blacking size 1/2" X 1/3" which lies 4" right from mid furrow.
c) Direction obliquly down-wards forward and to the right. During its course it has perforated skin, soft tissue, muscle meantery attached to the coils of large intestine, injury to the right hipbone. Liquid and clotted blood found in the pelvic cavity. Mention injuries are ante mortem.
Opinion:- In my opinion the cause of death was due to hemorrhage followed by shock as a result of above mentioned bullet injuries which are ante mortem and homicidal in nature."

29. P.W-9 Md. Joynal Abedin and P.W-12 Md. Feroz Miah, member of the Ansar Battalion, deposed that at the time of their duty they found that the victim was sitting with 4/5 people in front of the tea stall. P.W-10 S.I Md. Abu Mia was the seizure list witness. P.W-11 Md. Sabdar Ali was the ballistic expert. He submitted a ballistic report and supported the prosecution case. P.W-13 Md. Shariful Islam and P.W-14 Md. Sawkot Ali were the official colleagues of the informant. They went to the Hospital with the informant and heard about the occurrence from the deceased.

30. P.W-15 Ferdous Ara (Magistrate, First Class) recorded statement of witness Md. Shariful Islam under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

31. P.W-16 Constable Md. Amanullah was the seizure list witness. In his presence the Audio record was seized.

32. P.W-17 Nilufar Azad, daughter of the informant who first reported the incident to her father over mobile phone.

33. P.W-18 Md. Abdul Wadud Khan, the night guard who deposed that on the date of occurrence on 06.03.2009 he found that Sonju, Kabir, Julhas and Fazlu were gossiping in front of the tea stall.

34. P.W-19 FaysalAtik Bin Kader, Magistrate, First Class, recorded statement under Section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of witness Md. Abdul Wadud Khan and Md. Abdul Hamid.

35. P.W-20 S.I Md. Bazlur Rahman deposed that he heard that Kabir shot the victim Sonju.

36. P.W-21 S.I Murshed Zaman was an investigating officer of the case and he partly investigated the case.

37. P.W-22 Md. Shamsuddin Saleh also investigated the case and submitted charge sheet under Sections 302/34 of the Penal Code against 3 (three) accused including the appellant.

38. These are all of the evidence on record adduced by the prosecution to prove the charge.

39. Now the question calls for consideration how far the prosecution has proved the charge under Section 302 of the Penal Code against the appellant. Such question along with the submissions in favour of the appellant should be answered in the following manner:

40. In approaching and answering to the points drawn up, the cardinal principles of criminal jurisprudence in awarding conviction followed by sentence upon an indicted person demands meditation. A legal survey of law, appraisal of evidence browsing eye on materials brought on record, analysis of facts and circumstances of the case, inherent infirmities disturbing and striking facts of prosecution are also required to be taken into consideration. Rival contentions surged forward from both sides shall be also addressed and considered by us.

41. One of the fundamental principles of criminal jurisprudence and justice delivery system is that the accused should be presumed to be innocent until the charges are proved against him beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of clear, cogent and credible evidence and the onus of proving everything essential to the establishment of charge against the accused lies upon the prosecution which must prove charge substantially as laid to hilt and beyond all reasonable doubt on the strength of clear, cogent credible and unimpeachable evidence. In a criminal trial, the burden of proving the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubts always rests on the prosecution and on its failure; it cannot fall back upon the evidence adduced by the accused in support of his defence to rest its case solely thereon. Proof of charge must depend upon judicial evaluation of totality of evidence, oral and circumstantial, and not by an isolated scrutiny. Prosecution version is also required to be judged taking into account the overall circumstances of the case with a practical, pragmatic and reasonable approach in appreciation of evidence.

42. It is always to be remembered that justice delivery system cannot be carried away by heinous nature of crime or by gruesome manner in which it was found to have been committed and graver the charge is greater is the standard of proof required. It should also bear in mind that if the accused can create any doubt by adducing evidence or cross-examining the PWs in the prosecution case, the accused is entitled to get benefit of doubt. It is conveniently observed that though sad, yet is a fact that in our country there is a tendency on the part of the people to rope in as many people as possible for facing trial in respect of any criminal case: It has been even found that innocent person, including aged, infirm and rivals, are booked for standing on dock. Some are acquitted by the Court of first instance and some by appellate Court, but only having been in incarceration for years. Such efforts on the part of relatives of victim and other interested persons invariably is done and thus it becomes difficult on the part of a Court to find out the real culprit. Under such circumstances and in view of the prevalent criminal jurisprudential system, a judge is to find out the truth from a bundle of lies and to shift the grain out of chaff. A Judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent person is punished. A Judge, also presides to see that guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. Law therefore, cannot afford any favour other than truth and only truth.

43. We should bear in mind, credibility of testimony oral and circumstantial, depends considerably on a judicial evaluation of the totality, not isolated scrutiny. When dealing with the serious question of guilt or innocence of persons charged with crime, the following principles should be taken into consideration.
a) The onus of proving everything essential to the establishment of the charge against the accused lies on the prosecutor.
b) The evidence must be such as to exclude to a moral certainty every reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused.
c) In matters of doubt it is safer to acquit than to condemn, for it is better that several guilty persons should escape than that one innocent person suffers.
d) There must be clear and unequivocal proof of the corpus delicit.
e) The hypothesis of delinquency should be consistent with all the facts proved.

44. In spite of the presumption of truth attached to oral evidence under oath if the Court is not satisfied, the evidence in spite of oath is of no avail.

45. On going through the materials on record it transpires that the prosecution examined 22 witnesses out of 30 charge sheeted witnesses. Among them P.W.1 is the informant and father of the deceased Asaduzzaman Sonju, P.W.2, P.W-3, P.W-4, P.W-5 are local seizure list witnesses and also not eye witnesses of the occurrence. P.W-6 is the Constable who carried the dead body to the morgue. P.W-7, P.W-9 are the Constables and seizure list witnesses but not eye witnesses. P.W-8 Dr. A.K.M Shafiuzzaman, P.W-10 S.I Md. Abu Miaare the seizure list witnesses, P.W-11 Md. Sabdar Ali is a ballistic expert, P.W-12 Md. Feroz Mia his a member of Ansar Battalion, P.W-15 Ferdous Ara is a Magistrate, P.W-16 Constable Md. Amanullah, P.W-19 FaysalAtik Bin Kader, Magistrate, First Class, P.W-20 S.I BazlurRahman, P.W-21 S.I Murshed Zaman and P.W-22 S.I Md. Shamsuddin Saleh Ahmed Chowdhury all are official witnesses; of them P.W-8 held autopsy upon the cadaver of the deceased and P.W-22 submitted charge sheet against the 3(three) accused including the appellant.

46. On critical analysis of the above witnesses, we find that the prosecution case absolutely rests upon the evidence of P.W-1 Mohammad Ali who is the father of the deceased and informant of this case who heard about the occurrence from her daughter Nilufar Azad (P.W-17) and rushed to the scene with P.W-13 Md. Shariful Islam and P.W-14 Md. Sowkat Ali. The deceased also disclosed about the occurrence and firing by Humayun Kabir. The other witnesses were examined to corroborate the evidence of P.W-1, P.W-13, P.W-14 and P.W-17. We also find that P.W-9 Constable Md. Joynal Abedin, P.W-12 Md. Feroz Miah member of the Ansar, P.W-18 Md. Abdul Wadud Khan, night guard; they categorically stated that they found 4 (four) persons including the appellant were gossiping in front of the tea stall. Their such assertion was also made by the deceased to the P.W-1 and other witnesses. Therefore, we find that presence of the appellant at the scene of occurrence were well corroborated by the evidence on record.

47. Therefore, we find that the evidence against the appellantare also consistent, uniform and corroborative with each other. So, the same are also invulnerable to the credibility. The appellant unsuccessfully attempted to set a different case of enmity, but in support of which led no evidence in defence. So, the plea raised by the appellant has no leg to stand and as such on his behalf having not deliberately led any evidence in support of his pseudo plea, so it recoils against him.

48. On critical analysis of the above witnesses, we find that all the witnesses categorically narrated the manner of occurrence by which the appellant committed murder. Informant, P.W-1 Mohammad Ali is not an eye-witness. Other witnesses namely P.W.2, P.W.3, P.W.4, P.W.5 and P.W.6 categorically corroborated the evidence of P.W.1. Therefore, we find that the evidence against the appellantare consistent, uniform and corroborated with each other. So, the same are invulnerable to the credibility.

49. In this particular case we find that the prosecution tried to prove its case by producing 22 witnesses. They are all competent and their evidence are also self-contained. The appellant did not led any evidence although he had an explanation to the effect that there was an internal feud between them. In such situation the plea raised by the appellant has no leg to stand and as such on his behalf having not deliberately led any evidence in respect of his false/pseudo plea. So it recoils against him. It is significant to point out that there are consistent, uniform evidence against the convict-appellant by which the deceased succumbed to the injuries. So, in our view in the absence of any other reasonable explanation asto the safe departure of such facts, no conclusion other than the guilt of the appellant can be drawn.

50. It is true that P.W.1 is the informant and father of the deceased who did not expressly mentioned some facts from the ejahar but in his evidence he categorically stated all the facts which he witnessed and heard.

51. In our view such omission does not materially affect the prosecution case having regard to other evidence on that point.

52. In the case of State vs. Abdus Sattar and others 43 DLR (AD) 44 it was held:
"FIR can be used only to corroborate or contradict the maker thereof- There is neither any law nor any principle on the basis of which the testimony of another witness can be ignored or rejected because the informant had made an omission to mention about the fact which the witness stated in his deposition."

53. In the said case at paragraph 18 it was observed that:
"The first objection which is taken against the impugned judgment is that the learned Judges of the High Court Division have put forward such a ground for disbelieving PWs.4 and 5 (eye-witnesses), and this was the only ground, which was plainly in disregard of the accepted principles regarding the appreciation of the evidence. Both these witnesses claimed that they had been the respondents dragging away the deceased Abdul Hakim towards the house of respondent Nurul Haque by putting a gamcha on his neck. P.W-4 Arab Ali who was inside his house at that time was actually called out by P.W-5, Arshed Ali who first saw the dragging of the deceased. P.W-4 came out of his house and obstructed the respondents but he was driven away by some of the companions of the respondents. P.W-1, Abdur Rab, the informant, stated in his evidence that after the recovery of the dead-body of Abdul Hakim from the ditch, P.Ws.-4 and 5 informed him and others that they had seen the dragging of Abdul Hakim by the respondents. It has been noticed that P.Ws- 4 and 5 along with others accompanied P.W-1 to the house of Nurul Haque and the recovery of the dead body was made in their presence. P.W-1, however, did not mention the FIR that P.Ws- 4 and 5 had informed them that they had seen the dragging away of Abdul Hakim by the respondents. The learned Judges observed that there was no reason to omit this part of the story from the first information report and "accordingly we cannot place any reliance on the statement of P.Ws-4 and 5". It well-established that the FIR can be used only to corroborate or contradict the maker thereof, there is neither any law nor any principle on the basis of which the testimony of another witness can be ignored or rejected because the informant had made an omission to mention about the fact which the witness stated in his deposition. To reject the evidence of a witness only on such ground is against the accepted norms of the administration of criminal justice."

54. In the case of Dipok Kumar Sarkar vs. The State 8 BLD (AD) 109 it was held:
"First information Report-Its value in case of apparent omission of fact-FIR is not a piece of substantive evidence but may be used for corroborating or contradicting the maker only- The attention of the P.W having not been drawn to his omission in cross-examination, the defence could not take advantage of the contradiction (be omission)- Even otherwise this omission does not materially affect the prosecution case having regard to other evidence on the point-Evidence Act (1 of 1985) s. 145."

55. In the said case at it was observed at paragraph 12 that:
"As to the first ground it is seen that P.W-10 C. Bagharpara P. S. stated in his evidence that on reaching the P.O. he arrested the appellant and on his admission the dead-body of his wife was recovered from the latrine well of Pulin Sarkar and the appellant himself was engaged in bringing out and washing the dead-body. This statement, however, is not therein the F.I.R. made by him. There he stated that he received source information that the appellant had killed his wife and her dead-body had been concealed in the latrine well of Pulin Sarkar of the same village at a distance of about 200 yards. He lifted the dead-body from the well and go it washed in presence of witnesses and took the appellant into custody. Thus, there is apparently an omission in the FIR as to the recovery of the dead-body by the appellant himself following his admission. FIR is not a piece of substantive evidence out may be sued for corroborating or contradicting the maker only. Admittedly the attention of P.W-I was not drawn to his omission in cross-examination. The defence could not take advantage of the contradiction (by omission) without drawing the attention of P.W-I under Section 145 of the Evidence Act. Even otherwise we think this omission in the F.I.R. does not materially affect the prosecution case having regard to the other evidence in the point. P.W.B Jagadish Chandra Biswas, Dafadar, stated in his evidence that Dipak (appellant) pointed out the dead-body and himself brought it out from the latrine well. P.W-11 Md. Golam Mostafa, Commissioner, Narail Pourashava, (witness named in the FIR) also stated that Dipak admitted in his presence that he had concealed the dead-body of his wife in the Latrine well of Pulin and he himself brought it out thereform. These two witnesses are disinterested persons, they have no enimus against the appellant or his family and as such there is no reason to disbelieve their testimony as to the recovery of the dead-body by the appellant himself following his admission. It will be seen that the appellant himself admitted in his confession (which we shall presently consider) that on his admission police took him to the house of Pulin and caused him to bring out the dead-body of his Wife. Thus we are of the opinion that the aforesaid omission in the FIR could not be a reason for discarding the evidence of the witnesses on the point nor the same made the prosecution case doubtful in any manner."

56. It is true that amongst the witnesses P.Ws-1 and 17 are the close relations of the deceased; they were vital witnesses. The defence extensively cross-examined them but nothing could be elicited to shake their credibility in any manner whatsoever, so only for such cause their evidence should not be discarded.

57. The credit to be given to the statement of a witness is a matter not regulated by rule of procedure, but depends upon his knowledge of fact to which he testifies his disinterestedness, his integrity and his veracity. Apportion of oral evidence depends on such variable in consistence which as a human nature cannot be reduced as a set formula (40 DLR 58).

58. The weight to be attached to the testimony of witness depends in a large measure upon various consideration some of which are in the face of it his evidence should be in consonance with probabilities and consistent with other evidence and should generally so fit in with material details of the case for the prosecution as to carry conviction of truth to a prudent mind. In a word evidence of a witness is to be looked at from point of view of its credibility, it is quite unsafe to discard evidence of witness which otherwise appears reasonable and probable because of some suggestion regarding relationship against truthfulness of the witness.

59. Evidence of close persons of the victim cannot be discarded more particularly when close persons does not impair the same. Straightforward evidence given by witness who is closed to deceased cannot be rejected on sole ground that they are interested in prosecution. Ordinarily close person will be last person to screen real culprit and falsely implicate a person. So relationship far from being ground of criticism is often a sure guarantee of its truth (40 DLR 58).

60. From the materials on record, we failed to discover any express motive of accused in the crime of murder, for such cause prosecution will not fail, since motive is not ingredient of offence, prosecution is not bound to prove the motive of the accused for committing the crime 42 DLR (AD) 31; 10 MLR (AD) 175.

61. Motive does not play an effective role when premeditated and cold blooded murder is committed and established by irrefutable evidence. What is important is the nature of evidence and not the motive which may or may not be proved. Non-proof of motive cannot be a ground to discard the unimpeachable evidence (PLD 2001 SC 333).

62. Proof of motive or previous ill feeling is not necessary to sustain conviction when court is satisfied that appellants are assailants of the victim, but once motive was setup it was to be proved by the prosecution beyond doubt and failure to furnish cogent and reliable evidence could lead to adverse inference against prosecution (PLD 2000 Kar 128). Absence of motive is not ground for acquittal (PLD 1999 Lah 56). Particularly when ocular evidence is reliable and corroborated by medical evidence (AIR 2003 SC 3975). Appellate Division repeated the same view 57 DLR (AD) (2005) 75.

63. When offence proved motive is immaterial. Weakness of the motive alleged, though a circumstances to be taken into account, cannot be a ground for rejecting the direct testimony of ocular witness which is otherwise of a reliable character. If the offence has been satisfactorily proved by direct evidence then it is immaterial as to whether the motive has been established or not (1968 P. Cr. W 1251). 7 MLR (2002) 119. If there is no sufficient direct evidence motive may be matter for consideration specially when the case is based on circumstantial evidence (51 DLR 103).

64. Motive is a matter of speculation for what moves a person to take the life of another is within his special knowledge and does not constitute a necessary ingredient of the offence of murder, (1968 Cr.W 962).

65. In the case of Noor Md. Vs. State 1999 MLD (Pakistan Monthly Law Digest)-60 held:
"Eye witnesses were natural witnesses of the occurrence who had not only furnished convincing account of incident in details, but had also withstood hard test of cross-examination successfully-No rancour had been ascribed to appellant-Relationship of eye witnesses with the deceased was not by itself sufficient to discredit their testimony-Record did not indicate any sign to support the idea of substitution of accused with real culprit, if any-ocular account was fully supported by medical evidence and attending circumstances-conviction of accused was upheld in circumstances."

66. In the case of Md. Azeem Vs. State 1998 Pakistan Criminal LawJournal-175 it was held:
"Eye-witnesses who had no ill-will or motive against the accused had plausibly explained their presence at the spot and had corroborated their version given in their statements before the police-Ocular testimony was not in conflict with medical evidence-Prosecution had, thus, proved its case against accused beyond doubt- Conviction and sentence of death awarded to accused by trial Court were confirmed in circumstances."

67. Therefore, we find that the prosecution successfully proved the charges against the convict by cogent, convincing, unimpeachable evidence and beyond all reasonable doubt.

68. At the event of aforesaid situation, we also find support of our views by the following decisions.
(1) When there is enough material to prove the commission of offence of murder by the accused and that the evidence of eyewitnesses, though declared hostile, was reliable to some extent, the accused could be convicted for murder - Deepak v. State 1989 Cr.L.J. 143(MP).
(2) If the evidence of the solitary witness to murder is corroborated by medical evidence and FIR is promptly filed and there is absence of any evidence of grave and sudden provocation, the accused can lawfully be convicted for murder-Radhakrishnan v State (1989}1 Crimes 721 (Mad) (DB).
(3) If there is consistent evidence of two eyewitnesses and FIR is lodged quickly naming the accused and there is corroborative medical evidence, the Supreme Court will not interfere to disturb the conviction- Bikkar v State(1989) 2 Crimes 1 (SC).
(4) If the evidence of the eyewitnesses is corroborated by the circumstantial evidence, the accused must be convicted for murder- Harish v State (1989) 2 Crimes 72 (Del) (DB).
(5) Supreme Court will not interfere in appeal against order of conviction for murder passed by Sessions Judge and upheld by the High Court, when prosecution case was consistent with medical evidence and there was no delay in lodging F.I.R.- Amrik Singh V. State of Punjab 1981 Cr.L. J. 634; AIR 1981 SC 1171; 1981 SCC (Cr.) 252; 1981 Cr. L. J. (SC) 158.
(6) If circumstantial evidence is absolutely conclusive and clinching conviction for murder will not be set aside merely on ground that murder-spotand recovery of some ornaments were not proved- Murari Lal v State of U.P.1980 Cr.L.J. 1408; AIR 1981 SC 363(1979) SCC 612.
(7) If the circumstantial evidence against the accused in a murder case is firmly established and the circumstances unerringly point to the guilt of the accused and form a complete chain proving the guilt, the Supreme Court will not interfere with the concurrent findings except in case of grave injustice Ashok V State 1989 Cr.L. J. 2124, AIR 1989 SC 1890; (1989)2 Crimes 423.

69. The material points to be determined now isthat the injuries sustained by the deceased, whether these will constitute the offence of murder. The doctor P.W.8 opined that the death was due to hemorrhage followed by shock resulting from the bullet injuries which were ante mortem and homicidal in nature. On consideration of the injuries sustained upon the deceased the cause of murder we are to keep in touch with the provisions of culpable homicide and murder.
Firstly: The provision of section 300 of the Penal Code provides for murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or-
Secondly: If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or-
Thirdly: If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary cause of nature to cause death, or-
Fourthly: If the person committing the act knows that it is soimminently dangerous that it must in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause of death.

70. The provisions of section 299 provides for causing death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death or with the knowledge that is likely by such act to cause death or commits the offence of culpable homicide.

71. It is pertinent to point out that the witnesses who claimed to be vital witnesses they categorically deposed that prior to the occurrence there was an altercation held between them relating to use of passage, but there was no intention or premeditated plan for causing death. It is difficult to hold that the injuries were caused with the intention to cause the death nor such injuries appear to be sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature. But these injuries though caused intentionally are of such a nature that these are "likely to cause death". We do not think that this Criminal act of causing the death falls into any of the four categories of Criminal acts which constitute "murder" as prescribed in section 300 of the Penal Code. We rather find that this criminal act was done with the intention of causing such injuries as are likely to cause death, as described in section 299 of the Penal Code. As such, it constitutes culpable homicide not amounting to murder, punishable under section 304 Part 1 of the panel Code. With these regard reliance can be placed in the case of State Vs. Montu alias Nazrul Islam and others 44 DLR (AD)-287 and Joyaray Vs. State of Tamil Nadu 1976 Crl. L.J. 1186(SC).

72. Moreover, the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence in its entirety is well founded in the facts and circumstances of the case. So, the submissions advanced by the learned Counsel for the appellant in respect of merit of the case are not the correct exposition of law and facts. On the contrary the submissions advanced by the learned Additional Attorney-General prevails and appears to have good deal of force.

73. In the light of discussions made above and the preponderant judicial views emerging from the authorities referred to above, we are of the view that the impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence suffers from no legal infirmity with regards to the merit which calls for no interference by this Court. Thus, the appeal having no merit fails.

74. With regard to the sentence imposed upon the appellant, we are of the view that sentencing discretion on the part of a Judge is the most difficult task to perform. There is no system or procedure in the Criminal Justice Administration Method or Rule to exercise such discretion. In sentencing process, two important factors come out which shall shape appropriate sentence (i) Aggravating factor and (ii) Mitigating factor. These two factors control the sentencing process to a great extent. But it is always to be remembered that the object of sentence should be to see that the crime does not go unpunished and the society has the satisfaction that justice has been done and court responded to the society's cry for justice. Under section 302 of the Penal Code, though discretion has been conferred upon the Court to award two types of sentences, death or imprisonment for life, the discretion is to be exercised in accordance with the fundamental principle of criminal justice.

75. Therefore, the learned Judge of the High Court Division rightly sentenced him to suffer imprisonment for life and also to pay fine of Tk. 20,000/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 2 (two) years.

76. In view of foregoing narrative.

77. The appeal is dismissed.

78. The judgment and order of conviction and sentence dated 17.09.2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.7435 of 2010 (heard along with Death Reference No. 66 of 2010 and Jail Appeal No. 369 of 2010) is hereby confirmed.

79. The office is directed to send down the record at once.
===End===
===20SCOBHCD97===
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(SPECIAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

WRIT PETITION NO. 9935 of 2024
with
WRIT PETITION NO. 12431 of 2024

Dr. Badiul Alam Majumdar and others
.... Petitioners in writ petition No.9935 of 2024

Md. Mofazzal Hossain (Freedom Fighter)
.... Petitioner in writ petition No.12431 of 2024

-Versus-

Government of Bangladesh and others
.... Respondents in both the writ petitions.

Mrs. Justice Farah Mahbub
And
Mr. Justice Debasish Roy Chowdhury

COUNSELS:
Dr. Sharif Bhuiyan, Senior Advocate with Mr. Reduanul Karim, Advocate -- For the petitioners in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Fida M. Kamal, Senior Advocate with Mr. A.S.M. Shahriar Kabir, Advocate -- For the petitioner in writ petition No.12431 of 2024.
Mr. Md. Asaduzzaman, Attorney General with Mr. Asad Uddin, D.A.G with Mr. Tanim Khan, D.A.G with Ms. Syeda Shajia Sharmin, D.A.G with Mr. Ashadullah Al Galib, A.A.G with Mr. Md. Zasidul Islam (Jony), A.A.G with Mr. Arif Khan, A.A.G with Mrs. Maria Tanjimath, A.A.G with Mrs. Kazi Tamanna Ferdaus, A.A.G Mr. Md. Muzahedul Islam (Shahin), A.A.G with Ms. Shadia Afrin, A.A.G, and Mr. Siddiqur Rahman, A.A.G -- For the Respondent Nos.1-3 in both the writ petitions.

Mr. Mohammad Shishir Manir, Advocate with Mr. Mohammad Saddam Hossen, Advocate with Mr. Abdullah Sadiq, Advocate and Mr. Md. Mizanul Hoque, Advocate -- For the intervener No.4 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Mostafa Asgar Sharifee, Advocate in person -- For the intervener No.5 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar, Senior Advocate with Mr. Zainul Abedin, Senior Advocate with Mr. Md. Bodruddoza, Senior Advocate with Mr. Md. Ruhul Quddus (Kazal), Senior Advocate with Mr. Muhammad Nawshad Zamir, Advocate with Mr. Farzana Sharmin, Advocate with Mr. Mohammad Masum Billah, Advocate -- For the intervener No.6 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Subrata Chowdhury, Senior Advocate with Mr. Mohiuddin Abdul Kadir, Advocate -- For the intervener No.7 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Ms. Ishrat Hasan, Advocate with Mr. Md. Abdur Rouf, Advocate -- For the intervener No.8 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. ABM Hamidul Mishbah, Advocate in person -- For the intervener No.9 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Ehsan Abdullah Siddique, Advocate with Mr. Mohammed Belayet Hossain, Advocate -- For the intervener Nos. 10, 11, 12 and 13 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Junayed Ahmed Chowdhury, Advocate -- For the intervener No.14 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Ms. Sonia Zaman Khan, Advocate -- For the intervener No.15 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.
Mr. Abdul Momen Chowdhury, Advocate in person -- For the intervener No.16 in writ petition No.9935 of 2024.

Date of Hearing: 30-10-2024, 06-11-2024, 07-11-2024, 13-11-2024, 14-11-2024, 20-11-2024, 27-11-2024, 28-11-2024, 01-12-2024, 04-12-2024 & 05-12-2024
Date of Judgment: 17-12-2024

JUDGMENT

Farah Mahbub, J:

1. Instant Rules Nisi in connection with writ petitions bearing Nos.9935 and 12431 both of 2024 involve common question of law and facts as such, those have been heard together and are being disposed of by this single judgment.

2. In writ petition No.9935 of 2024 the petitioners as being the conscious citizens of the country filed the application under Article 102 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh (in short, the Constitution) in the nature of public interest litigation challenging the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 (Act No. 14 of 2011) to be declared ultra vires the Constitution. At the same time, the petitioners sought for a direction as to why the previous actions and deeds done or taken in any manner whatsoever in pursuance of the said Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 should not be condoned as transactions past and closed.

3. This Court having found prima-facie substance issued a Rule Nisi accordingly.

4. Subsequently, respective interveners have come forward with their prayers to assist the Court on the issues in question for proper dispensation of justice, which were duly allowed by passing necessary orders.

5. Subsequent to the issuance of the earlier Rule Nisi another writ petition has been filed bearing No. 12431 of 2024 by the respective petitioner also, in the nature of public interest litigation challenging particular provisions of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011, namely, Sections 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 16, 20, 21, 22, 39, 42, 44, 47, 50, 53 and 55 of the Act No. 14 of 2011 to be declared ultra vires the Constitution; hence, void whereupon a Rule Nisi was issued by this Court.

Locus Standi: Do the petitioners have respective standing to maintain the instant writ petitions?

6. It is, however, the established principle of law that in order to maintain respective writ petitions, filed in the nature of public interest litigation, the petitioners need to overcome the threshold of locus standi.

7. In this regard, in Dr. Mohiuddin Faroque v. Bangladesh reported in 49 DLR (AD)1, para-48 Mostafa Kamal, J. observed: ".. The traditional view remains true, valid and effective till to-day in so far as-individual rights and individual infraction thereof are concerned. But when a public injury or public wrong or infraction of a fundamental right affecting an indeterminate number of people is involved, it is not necessary, in the scheme of our Constitution, that the multitude of individuals who has been collectively wronged or injured or whose collective fundamental rights have been invaded are to invoke the jurisdiction under Article 102 in a multitude of individual writ petitions, each representing his own portion of concern. In so far as it concerns public wrong or public injury or invasion of fundamental rights of an indeterminate number of people, any member of the public, being a citizen, suffering the common injury or common invasion in common with others or any citizen or an indigenous association, as distinguished from a local component of a foreign organization, espousing that particular cause is a person aggrieved and has the right to invoke the jurisdiction under Article 102."

8. In the said case B.B. Roy Chowdhury, J observed: "In this backdrop the meaning of the expression "person aggrieved" occurring in the aforesaid clauses (1) and (2) (a) of Article 102 is to be understood and not in an isolated manner. It cannot be conceived that its interpretation should be purged of the spirit of the Constitution as clearly indicated in the Preamble and other provisions of our Constitution, as discussed above. It is unthinkable that the framers of the Constitution had in their mind that the grievances of millions of our people should go unredressed, merely because they are unable to reach the doors of the court owing to abject poverty, illiteracy, ignorance and disadvantaged condition. It could never have been the intention of the framers of the Constitution to outclass them. In such harrowing conditions of our people in general if socially conscious and public-spirited persons are not allowed to approach the court on behalf of the public or a section thereof for enforcement of their rights the very scheme of the Constitution will be frustrated. The inescapable conclusion, therefore, is that the expression "person aggrieved" means not only any person who is personally aggrieved but also one whose heart bleeds for his less fortunate fellow beings for a wrong done by the Government, or a local authority in not fulfilling its constitutional or statutory obligations. It does not however, extend to a person who is an interloper and interferes with things which do not concern him. This approach is in keeping with the constitutional principles that are being evolved in the recent times in different countries."

9. The issues, being raised in the instant writ petitions by the public spirited and conscious citizens of the country including the respective political parties, are embedded in democracy and rule of law which are, among others, basic principles of our Constitution, which are claimed to have been clouded, shrinking the right to franchise being blatantly snatched away from the mass people. It raises question of malafide exercise of power by the Legislature and also, of transparency in promulgating the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 and thereby destroying the core concept "we, the people of Bangladesh", which is the embodiment of the will of the people, as enshrined in Article 7 of the Constitution. They have come forward seeking judicial intervention to ensure prevention of illegal and unconstitutional encroachments upon the guaranteed civil and fundamental rights of an indefinite number of people of Bangladesh and to uphold the rule of law; and most importantly, being supported by the respondent government.

10. Public interest litigation is to be used as an effective weapon in the armory of law for delivering social justice to the citizens: Neetu Vs. State of Panjab and others: AIR 2007 SC 758. It is entertained when an issue of great public importance is involved, presenting element of infraction of one or the other fundamental rights as contained in Part III of the Constitution: National Council for Civil Liberties Vs. Union of India and others: AIR 2007 SC 2631. The law is a social auditor and this audit function can be put into action only when someone with real public interest ignites the jurisdiction. In a society like ours activism is considered essential for participative public justice for which risks were considered to be taken by affording more opportunities for the public minded citizens to rely on the legal process and not to be repelled from it by narrow pedantry now surrounding locus standi: Fertilizer Corporation Kamagar (Regd.), Sindri and others V. Union of India and others: AIR 1981 SC 344.

11. Considering the nature of grievances being agitated before this Court the petitioners including the interveners, however, do not appear to be either officious bystander or interlopers or busy body to invoke writ jurisdiction under Article 102 of the Constitution.

12. Accordingly, it is our considered view that these are probono publico litigations and the petitioners being persons aggrieved within the meaning of Article 102 of the Constitution have locus standi to invoke writ jurisdiction.

13. In both the writ petitions, the categorical assertions of the petitioners are that the impugned Act No. 14 of 2011 and/ or the respective provisions of the said Act are squarely repugnant to and are inconsistent with the basic structures of our Constitution and that said Act and/or the respective provisions of the Act of 2011 is/are beyond the amending power of the Parliament as provided under Article 142 of the Constitution; as such, is / are liable to be knocked down.

14. The people of Bangladesh having proclaimed independence on the 26th day of March, 1971 and through a historic war for national independence established the independent, sovereign People's Republic of Bangladesh [Article 1 of the Constitution]. The Constitution of Bangladesh, adopted on 16th December, 1972, demonstrates the people as the dominant actors and it is the manifestation of what is called "the people's power": Dr. Mohiuddin Farooque vs. Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resources and Flood Control and others (1997) 49 DLR (AD) 1, Para-41. Relevant part of the said para is quoted below:

"As to (i) above, it is wrong to view our Constitution as just a replica with local adaptations of a Constitution of the Westminster model among the Commonwealth countries of Anglo-Saxon legal tradition. This Constitution of ours is not the outcome of a negotiated settlement with a former colonial power. It was not drawn upon the consent, concurrence or approval of any external sovereign power. Nor is it the last of an oft-replaced and oft-substituted Constitution after several Constitutions were tried and failed, although as many as 13 amendments have so far been made to it. It is the fruit of a historic war of independence, achieved with the lives and sacrifice of a telling number of people for a common cause making it a class part from other Constitutions of comparable description. It is a Constitution in which the people features as the dominant actor. It was the people of Bangladesh who in exercise of their own self-proclaimed native power made a clean break from the past unshackling the bondage of a past statehood and adopted a Constitution of its own choosing. The Constitution, historically and in real terms, is a manifestation of what is called "the People's Power". The people of Bangladesh, therefore, are central, as opposed to ornamental, to the framing of the Constitution."

15. The framers of the Constitution spelt out the objectives of the Constitution through its Preamble declaring the high ideals of absolute trust and faith in the Almighty Allah, nationalism, democracy and socialism meaning economic and social justice; to establish a socialist society through the democratic process, which shall be free from exploitation, in which rule of law, fundamental human rights and freedom, equality and justice, political, economic and social will be secured for all the citizens; to maintain the supremacy of the Constitution as the embodiment of the will of the people of Bangladesh so that the people may prosper in freedom keeping with the progressive aspirations of mankind [Preamble of the Constitution]. Article 7, which has been termed by our Appellate Division in the case of Anwar Hossain Chowdhury and others Vs. Bangladesh: 41DLR(AD) 165, para-57, p-197 as the "pole star of our Constitution" declaring the people to be the source of power and their exercise on behalf of the people shall be effected only under, and by the authority of the Constitution[Article 7(1)]. This Constitution is the solemn expression of the will of the people, the supreme law of the land. If, however, any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution that other law shall, to the extent of inconsistency, be void [Article 7(2)].

16. In A. T. Mridha Vs. State reported in 25 DLR (HCD) pp-335 and 344 it has been observed, inter-alia, "The Constitution is the supreme law and all laws are to be tested on the touch-stone of the Constitution (Article 7). It is the supreme law because it exists; it exists because the will of the people is reflected in it. History of mankind is replete with instances when a Constitution ceased to exist because the will of the people was either not reflected in it or the support was withdrawn ultimately."

17. While observing on the jurisdiction or power of the Constitutional Court to consider the validity of law the Appellate Division found in Anowar Hossain Chowdhury case (supra) p-214, para-167:

"Law as defined in Article 152 means any Act, ordinance, order, rule and regulations by law, notification or other legal instruments and any custom or usage having the force of law in Bangladesh. Article 7 says that if any law is inconsistent with the Constitution that law shall to the extent of inconsistency be void. When Article 26 says about the inconsistency of any law with the fundamental rights to be void, Article 7 operates in the whole jurisdiction to say that any law and that law includes also any amendment of the Constitution itself because Article 142 says that amendment can be made by Act of Parliament. Therefore, if any amendment which is an Act of Parliament contravenes any express provision of the Constitution that amendment Act is liable to be declared void. So says Article 7. But by whom this declaration is to be made? It is the executive which initiates the proposal for law. It is the legislature that passes the law. Then who will consider the validity or otherwise of the law-obviously the judiciary"

The Constitution is a living organism capable of growth with the passage of time.

"Now it is to be seen what is the necessity of an amendment of a Constitution when it is "intended to last for all ages to come", as observed by Marshal, C.J. The answer has been given by himself when he added "and consequently to be adapted to various crisis of human affairs". Holmes, J. observed that Constitution should be "interpreted according to the felt necessities of the time". Brandies observed in "United States Vs. Moreland", 258 US 433 (1922) as quoted in "The Judicial Process" by J. Abraham: "Our Constitution is not a straight jacket. It is a living organism. As such it is capable of growth, of expansion, and of adaptation to new conditions. Growth implies changes, political, economic and social. Growth which is significant manifests itself rather in intellectual and moral conceptions than in material things. Ivor Jennings is of the view that it is impossible for the framers of a Constitution to "foresee the conditions in which it would apply and the problems which will arise." From these wise sayings as well as on experience, it may be taken that though a Constitution is intended to last for ever, it is necessary to keep it in agreement with the spirit of the time without impairing its fundamental principles." Anowar Hussain Chowdhury Case (supra) 1989 BLD (Spl)1, para-333.

18. The Constitution is the very framework of the body policy: its life and soul; it is the fountainhead of all its authority, the main spring of all its strength and power. The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are all its creation, and derive their sustenance from it. It is unlike other statutes, which can be at any time altered, modified or repealed. Therefore, the language of the Constitution should be interpreted as if it were a living organism capable of growth and development if interpreted in the broad and liberal spirit, and not in a narrow and pedantic sense.

19. The Constitution is not merely concerned with the present and the past; but is built for the future. We cannot but presume that in the normal course, they must have peeped into the future "far as human eye could see" or as far as human intellect could probe, and foreseen these contingencies: State of Rajasthan Vs. Shamlal: AIR 1960 Raj 256, pp 265-266. The Constitution and the statute in a way emanate from the same source, that is, the people, but there is difference in the mode of their enactment. While the Constitution is the direct mandate of the people themselves, the statute is an expression of the will of the legislature only, though the legislature is also the representative of the people. Opp Cotton Mills Vs. Administrator; 85 LEd 624, p.636, 312 US 126, per Stone, J. It is a living and organic thing and must adopt itself to the changing situations and pattern in which it has to be interpreted: N.S. Bindra's Interpretation of Statutes, Tenth Edition, pp 1261-1262.

20. It is proper to assume that a Constitution is intended to meet and be applied to new conditions and circumstances as they may arise in the course of the progress of the community: Ashok Kumar Gupta and another Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others: (1997) 5SCC 201.

21. The judges, therefore, should respond to the human situations to meet the felt necessities of the time and social needs; make meaningful the right to life and give effect to the Constitution and the will of the legislature. The Supreme Court as the vehicle of transforming the nation's life should respond to the nation's needs, interpret the law with pragmatism to further public welfare to make the constitutional animations a reality and interpret the Constitution broadly and liberally enabling the citizens to enjoy the rights: Ashok Kumar Gupta's case (supra).

22. A Constitution is not just a document in solemn form, but a living framework for the government of the people exhibiting a sufficient degree of cohesion and its successful working depends upon the democratic spirit underlying it being respected in letter and in spirit: SR Choudhuri Vs. State of Punjab and others: (2001) 7SCC 126. In Naveen Jindal Vs. Union of India: AIR 2004 SC 1559, the court observed that the Constitution being a living organ, its ongoing interpretation is permissible.

23. We are to remember that it is a Constitution, a mechanism under which laws are to be made, and not merely an Act which declares what the law is to be: Attorney General for NSW Vs. Brewery Employees Union of NSW, 6CLR 469, pp. 611-612.

24. In this regard, Marshall C.J. in his famous judgment in McCulloch Vs. Maryland: 4 Wheat 316, 407, expressed in these words: "In considering this question, then we must never forget that it is a Constitution we are expounding".

25. The doctrine of basic structure, as embedded in the Constitution. What constitutes basic structure is not like "a twinkling star up above the Constitution". It does not consist of any abstract ideals to be found outside the provisions of the Constitution. The permeable, no doubt, enumerates great concepts embodying the ideological aspirations of the people but these concepts are particularised and their essential features delineated in the various provisions of the Constitution. It is these specific provisions in the body of the Constitution which determine the type of democracy which the founders of that instrument established; the quality and nature of justice, political, social and economic which they aim to realise, the content of liberty of thought and expression which they entrenched in that document and scope of equality of status and of opportunity which they enshrined in it. These specific provisions enacted in the Constitution alone can determine the basic structure of the Constitution. These specific provisions, either separately or in combination, determine the content of the great concepts set out in the Preamble. It is impossible to spin out any concrete concept of basic structure out of the gossamer concepts set out in the Preamble. The specific provisions of the Constitution are the stuff from which the basic structure has to be woven- Indira Nehra Gandlhi Vs. Raj Narain, 1975 Supp SCC 1.

26. Fact remains, a Constitution, unlike other statutes, is intended to be paramount and is to endure for ages. If the ordinary rule of contemporary meaning were given to a Constitution it would be to command the race to halt in its progress: Borgins V. Falk: (1911) 147 WIS 327.

27. The concept of basic structure giving coherence and durability to a Constitution has certain intrinsic force. The development of this doctrine is the emergence of the constitutional principles in their own right. It is not based on literal wording. Some of these principles may be so important and fundamental, as to qualify as "essential features" or part of the "basic structure" of the Constitution, that is to say, they are not open to amendment. The basic structure concepts limit the amending power of the Parliament. For a constitutional principle to qualify as an essential feature, it must be established that the said principle is a part of the Constitutional law binding on the Legislature. Only thereafter, the second step is to be taken, namely, whether the principle is so fundamental as to bind even the amending power of the Parliament, i.e. to form a part of the basic structure. This is the standard of judicial review on the amendment of Constitution in the context of the doctrine of basic structure: M. Nagaraj and others Vs. Union of India and others: AIR 2007 SC 71.

28. Therefore, the existence of the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution at will, with requisite voting strength, so as to make any laws that excludes Part III including the power of judicial review is incompatible with the doctrine of basic structure: M. Nagaraj's case (supra). Such an exercise if challenged has to be tested on the touchstone of basic structure of the Constitution: R. Coelho (dead) by L. Rs. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu: AIR 2007 SC 86.

29. The doctrine of basic structure has its origin in Muhammad Abdul Haque Vs. Fazlul Qader Chowdhury: PLD 1963 Dacca, para-61, p-669 (referred to as Dhaka High Court Case). In the said case, while examining the legality of the authority of the respondents by which they still claimed to be the members of the National Assembly in spite of the fact that shortly after their election to the above mentioned Assembly, they were appointed to the President's Council of Ministers, the High Court of Dacca made observations on the concept of basic provisions of the Constitution. Relevant part is quoted as below:

"In PLD 1957 SC (Pak.) 219=(1957) 9 DLR (SC) 178 on a reference made by the President of Pakistan, Munir, C.J., in delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, repelled the contention that the President, in the exercise of his power under Article 234 of the 1956 Constitution, could destroy a basic or vital provision of the Constitution. At page 238 [corresponds to para. 34 of DLR (SC)] of the report, his Lordship has observed thus: The Constitution defines qualifications which a candidate for election to the Provincial Assembly, or a voter in a constituency for such Assembly must possess; but Mr. Manzur Qadir would give to the President under Article 234 the power to destroy, though for a temporary period, the very basis of the new Constitution by claiming for him the power to form the constituencies and to order the preparation of electoral rolls in direct violence of the Constitution merely to implement the decision of a Governor. The aforesaid dictum of the Supreme Court of Pakistan is a pointer that in the case before us the power of "adaptation" does not extend to the wiping out of a vital provision of the Constitution to implement a decision of the members of the Assembly who were invited to be Ministers".

30. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Pakistan in Fazlul Quader Chowdhury and others Vs. Muhammad Abdul Haque: 18 DLR SC (1966) 69, para-24 and 86 affirmed the recognition of basic provisions of the Constitution. Relevant part runs as follows:

"The aspect of the franchise, and of the form of Government are fundamental features of a Constitution, and to alter them, in limine in order to placate or secure the support of a few persons, would appear to be equivalent not to bringing the given Constitution into force, but to bringing into effect an altered or different Constitution. The further limitation inherent in the terms of this clause appears to be that the difficulty must be such that could be removed by way of an adaptation which can, under no canon of construction, be held to extend to the making of even radical amendments or alterations in the main fabric of the Constitution.

31. While resolving the validity of the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, Mudholkar J. of the Indian Supreme Court in Sajjan Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan: AIR 1965 SC 845, para-63 citing the aforesaid decision of the Pakistan Supreme Court, observed as follows:

"On the other hand under Art. 368 a procedure is prescribed for amending the Constitution. If upon a literal interpretation of this provision an amendment even of the basic features of the Constitution would be possible it will be a question for consideration as to how to harmonise the duty of allegiance to the Constitution with the power to make an amendment to it. Could the two be harmonised by excluding from the procedure for amendment, alteration of a basic feature of the Constitution? It would be of interest to mention that the Supreme Court of Pakistan has, in Mr. Fazlul Quader Chowdhry v. Mr. Mohd. Abdul Haque (1963 P.L.D. 486) held that franchise and form of government are fundamental features of a Constitution and the power conferred upon the President by the Constitution of Pakistan to remove difficulties does not extend to making an alteration in a fundamental feature of the Constitution."

32. In Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and others Vs. State of Kerala: AIR 1973 SC 1461, para-658 the Supreme Court of India while referring to Sajjan Singh's case in connection with the amending power of the Constitution observed as under:

"The question whether there is any implied limitation on the amending power under Article 368 has not been decided by this Court till now. That question did not come up for consideration in Sankari Prasad's case. In Sajjan Singh's case neither the majority speaking through Gajendragadkar C.J. nor Hidayatullah J. (as he then was) went into that question. But Mudholkar J. did foresee the importance of that aspect. He observed in the course of his judgment: We may also have to bear in mind the fact that ours is a written Constitution. The Constituent Assembly which was the repository of sovereignty could well have created a sovereign Parliament on the British model. But instead it enacted a written Constitution, created three organs of State, made the Union executive responsible to Parliament and the State executive to the State legislatures, erected a federal structure and distributed legislative power between Parliament and the State Legislatures; recognised certain rights as fundamental and provided for their enforcement, prescribed forms of oaths of office or affirmations which require those who subscribe to them to owe true allegiance to the Constitution and further require the members of the Union judiciary and of the Higher judiciary in the States, to uphold the Constitution. Above all, it formulated a solemn and dignified preamble which appears to be an epitome of the basic features of the Constitution. Can it not be said that these are indicia of the intention of the Constituent Assembly to give a permanency to the basic features of the Constitution? It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change in a basic feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an amendment or would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution; and if the latter, would it be within the purview of Article 368?"

33. Thus, it is apparent from the above that the doctrine of basic structure of the Constitution has its root in Fazlul Quader's Case, which originated from Dhaka High Court Case. However, in Kesavananda's case the Indian Supreme Court while elaborating the features of basic structure of the Constitution further goes to observe as follows:

"The learned Attorney General said that every provision of the Constitution is essential; otherwise it would not have been put in the Constitution. This is true. But this does not place every provision of the Constitution in the same position. The true position is that every provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in the result the basic foundation and structure of the Constitution remains the same. The basic structure may be said to consist of the following features: (1) Supremacy of the Constitution; (2) Republican and Democratic form of Government; (3) Secular character of the Constitution; (4) Separation of powers between the Legislature, the executive and the judiciary; (5) Federal character of the Constitution. [Para 302]. the above structure is built on the basic foundation, i.e., the dignity and freedom of the individual. This is of supreme importance. This cannot by any form of amendment be destroyed."[Para 303].

34. Our Appellate Division has recognized the doctrine of basic structure of the Constitution while dealing with the constitutional validity of the Constitution (Eighth Amendment) Act, 1988, known as the 8th Amendment, so far it related to Article 100 of the Constitution. Said Article of the Constitution was challenged in the case of Anowar Hossain Chowdhury (supra) on the assertion that the impugned amendment was beyond the amending power of the Parliament under Article 142 of the Constitution and that by this amendment a basic structure of the Constitution was destroyed. However, while discussing the purpose and scope of the doctrine of basic structure the Appellate Division observed, inter-alia:

"The doctrine of basic structure is one growing point in the constitutional jurisprudence. It has developed in a climate where the executive, commanding an overwhelming majority in the legislature, gets snap amendments of the Constitution passed without a Green Paper or White Paper, without eliciting any public opinion, without sending the Bill to any select committee and without giving sufficient time to the members of the Parliament for deliberation of the Bill for amendment......" 1989 BLD (Special Issue) 1, para-435, -169.

35. If we give a glance at our Constitution for the purpose of amendment, it would be apparent that this is not at all a rigid Constitution. It has undergone several amendments since its birth; however, those were measured on the touchstone of the basic structures of the Constitution in order to be mandated as justified amendments. It is, therefore, the nature of invasion which attracts the doctrine of basic structure, which has now become an established principle and recognised by the Constitution itself.

36. Considering the history of our Construction, its scheme and framework, embodiment of the respective provisions, in particular Articles 7 and 142 there is no manner of doubt to find that the Constitution of Bangladesh is never intended to be static. It is a living organism capable of growth with the passage of time in order to meet the demand of the people, who are supreme and exercise the ultimate power of the Constitution.

37. However, after 8th Amendment Case (by a majority views) it is now settled that the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution is not unlimited. The Parliament could not under Article 142 expand its amending power to damage its essential features or to destroy its basic structure. However, if any changes are brought about by amendments destroying the basic structures of the Constitution, such amendments would be void, as being ultra vires the Constitution.

38. The Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011: Is it ultra vies the Constitution?
Vide " ( ) , " the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 (Act No. 14 of 2011) (in short, the Act, 2011) the 9th Parliament brought amendment in 55 different provisions of the Constitution including its Preamble.

39. As stated above, the petitioners of writ petition No.9935 of 2024 have challenged the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 in its entirety to be declared ultra vires the Constitution. On the other hand, the petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024 has challenged respective provisions of the Act No.14 of 2011 as being ultra vires the Constitution.

40. Prior to placing respective arguments in support of the Rule Nisi in connection with writ petition No.9935 of 2024 Mr. Sharif Bhuiyan, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners at the very outset submits that he will not press the 2nd part of the Rule so far it relates to seeking condonation of the previous actions and deeds done or taken in any manner whatsoever pursuant to the impugned Act, 2011.

41. However, in order to have the impugned Act No. 14 of 2011 struck down the first line of argument being placed by Mr. Sharif is the process of enacting the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011.

42. In this regard, his categorical contention is that pursuant to the proposal so made by the then head of the erstwhile government a 15 members Special Parliamentary Committee was formed on 21.07.2010 under Rule 266 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament headed by 2(two) senior and renowned parliamentarians of the then ruling party. Even, the then head of the executive was involved in the said process. However, the only term of reference of the said committee was "amendment of the Constitution", i.e. to recommend what amendments to the Constitution were to be made. During the course of proceeding the Parliamentary Special Committee took recommendations from 104 distinguished citizens including a former president, the incumbent prime minister, three former chief justices, political leaders, editors and civil society members. The recommendations of the said committee had represented a consensus amongst the politicians, civil society and the citizens and were in favor of retaining Non Party Caretaker Government system (in short, NPCG system).

43. Meanwhile, the Hon'ble Appellate Division passed the short order on 10 May 2011 declaring the NPCG system prospectively illegal. Following the short order, the Parliamentary Special Committee held several meetings and prepared a unanimous recommendation report on 29 May 2011 with recommendation to amend the Constitution by retaining the NPCG system.

44. On 30 May 2011, i.e. the day following the finalization of the unanimous recommendations, members of the Parliamentary Special Committee met the then Prime Minister. Subsequently, the Chairperson and Co-chairperson held a meeting with the Prime Minister, which led to a change in the committee's previous recommendation. Accordingly, the Parliamentary Special Committee prepared and submitted final report on 5 June 2011 recommending abolition of the NPCG system.

45. After the meeting with the Prime Minister, the Committee prepared a report containing 51 recommendations which was approved by the Cabinet on 20 June 2011. On 25 June 2011 the 15th Amendment Bill was presented to the Parliament. On the same day, i.e. 25 June 2011, the Bill was sent to the Parliamentary Standing Committee for its scrutiny, and was given 14 (fourteen) days to review the Bill. The Parliamentary Standing Committee, with a recommendation to add four sub-articles, submitted the Bill containing 55 Articles to the Parliament on 29 June 2011. The next day, i.e. on 30 June 2011, the Bill was passed in the Parliament.

46. Thus, he submits, the day on which the Bill was presented to the Parliament, it was sent to the Parliamentary Standing Committee. So, the Parliament had zero days. There was no debate on any Article of the Fifteenth Amendment in the Parliament. The Parliamentary Standing Committee, although had 14 (fourteen) days to scrutinize the Bill, it used 4(four) days only and did not make any comment on any Article, it only recommended to add four sub-articles. The Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted the Bill to the Parliament on 29 June 2011, and the Bill was passed on 30 June 2011. Again, there was no discussion or debate on any article. So, the Parliament had zero role in passing the Bill which contained 55 sections, out of which Section 1 contains short title of the Bill. The remaining 54 amending sections contained different natures, the review of which would have taken a considerable amount of time, definitely a number of days, but no discussions took place about the Bill. The aforesaid sequence of events goes to show that the Fifteenth Amendment was passed in an unusually hasty manner.

47. Said assertion of facts are not disputed by the respondent-government by filing any affidavit-in-opposition.

48. In this regard, referring to Article 78(1) of the Constitution Mr. Sharif goes to argue that though vide the said provision of law the validity of the proceedings in Parliament shall not be questioned in any court but in the present case the procedure as provided in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament has been violated in passing the Act No.14 of 2011 insofar as the Parliamentary Special Committee was constituted for a specific purpose, i.e. to provide recommendations in relation to the amendment of the Constitution. Said committee provided its recommendations on 29 May 2011. However, due to the interference of the then head of the government the Committee changed its recommendations, which impairs the basic structure of the Constitution inasmuch as the interference by the executive with the work of the Parliamentary Special Committee is against the doctrine of separation of power, a basic structure of the Constitution.

49. Furthermore, he contends, the Supreme Court of Bangladesh in Government of Bangladesh and others. Vs. Md. Masud Rana and others: 15LM (AD) 2023, p-616, para 24 held, inter-alia:

Courts power of judicial review on the proceedings of Parliament is not absolutely ousted. In certain facts and circumstances, in particular on the grounds of lack of jurisdiction or it being a nullity for some reasons such as gross illegality, irrationality, violation of constitutional mandate, mala fides, non-compliance with rules of natural justice and perversity, Court has the jurisdiction to exercise its power under judicial review."

50. In view of the said observations of the Appellate Division, he submits, this Hon'ble Court is empowered under judicial review to look into the proceedings of Parliament that was followed in enacting the Fifteenth Amendment. In support he has relied upon the case of Farzand Ali Vs. West Pakistan (1970) 22DLR SC 203, para 56, where the Supreme Court of Pakistan considered the scope of Article 111 of the Pakistan Constitution and held that the absence of the words "on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure" does not indicate that the scope of the immunity has been enlarged. The relevant part is quoted as follows:

"In this connection I may also point out that the learned Attorney General appearing in response to a notice issued to him under Order XLV rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules, very frankly conceded that if total strangers or intruders, without any color of right, had participated in the Assembly, that proceeding would not be a valid proceeding and the courts would be entitled to question the validity of such a proceeding notwithstanding the provisions of article 111. If this be so, then it is obvious that the bar created by clause (1) of Article 111 notwithstanding the omission of the words "on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure", which occurred in sections 41 (1) and 48 (1) of the Government of India Act, 1935, was not an absolute bar."

51. He also relies upon the case of Justice K.S. Puttaswamy and others Vs. Union of India and others: 255 (2018) DLT 1, para-61 where the Indian Supreme Court held that courts are not prohibited from exercising their power of judicial review to examine any illegality or unconstitutionality in the procedure of Parliament.

52. Accordingly, he submits that since there was clear violation in the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament and was done with mala fide intention; hence, the privilege under Article 78(1) will not be applicable. Consequently, Act No.14 of 2011 must be held void in its entirety.

53. In support of the said contentions Mr. Fida M. Kamal, the learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. A.S.M. Shahriar Kabir, the learned Advocate on behalf of the petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024 submits that every successful revolution gives the citizen a right to challenge the act and omissions of the previous autocratic regimes. After the glorious August revolution, he goes to argue, the power of the people, the rule of law and judicial independence were restored, and the petitioner accordingly, challenged the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011.

54. In Marbury vs Madison, as he submits, it was held that "We are under a Constitution, but the Constitution is what the judges say it is". In Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case (supra), it was established that Article 102 of the Constitution is the fabric of the Constitution. In this regard he goes to submit that a constitutional amendment can be adjudged repugnant on at least three grounds: (i) lack of legislative competence; (ii) lack of procedural compliance and (iii) lack of substantive compatibility. In the said case, it was observed by our apex court that the authority to decide the constitutionality of any laws, including a constitutional amendment, lies with the Supreme Court of Bangladesh by virtue of Article 7(2) of the Constitution, which was affirmed by the Hon'ble Appellate Division in Government of Bangladesh and others. Vs. Advocate Asaduzzaman Siddiqui and others:71 DLR (AD) (2019) 52 (popularly known as 16th Amendment Case) finding, inter-alia, that removal of judges through the Supreme Judicial Council became a part of the basic structure of the Constitution as it reinforces and ensures a basic structure namely, the "independence of judiciary". Accordingly, the Appellate Division declared the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment), Act, 2014, which sought to amend the provision relating to Supreme Judicial Council, unconstitutional.

55. He accordingly, submits that the constituent power lies with the people of Bangladesh, and Article 142(1A) expressly recognises this fact. Judges are by their oath of office bound to preserve, defend and protect the Constitution and in exercise of this power and function they shall act without any fear or favour and be guided by the dictates of conscience and the principle of self-restraint. Thomas Paine, a French revolutionary and a political philosopher stated that all power exercised by a State must have some beginning and that beginning is the constituent power, and it really means that the power delivered by the citizens to the State is for promulgation of a Constitution.

56. The Provisional Constitution of Bangladesh Order, 1972 was promulgated on 11th January 1972 which, no doubt, is the constituent power for promulgation of the Constitution. The Constitution Assembly adopted and enacted the Constitution on the 4th November, 1972; however, the constituent power dies at the time of promulgation of Constitution. The constituted power on the other hand, is a creature of the Constitution, and that power must be exercised within the boundary of the Constitution. The Constitution of Bangladesh was given constituted power for making constitutional amendment along with the power to promulgate laws. Article 142 of the Constitution is the source to exercise constituted power for amending the Constitution.

57. While describing the test for an amendment to become part of the Constitution, our Appellate Division has observed in Anwar Hossain Chowdhuiry (supra) para- 380, p-253:

"Before the amendment becomes a part of the Constitution it shall have to pass through some test, because it is not enacted by the people through a Constituent Assembly. Test is that the amendment has been made after strictly complying with the mandatory procedural requirements, that it has not been brought about by practicing any deception or fraud upon statutes and that it is not so repugnant to the existing provision of the Constitution, that its coexistence therewith will render the Constitution unworkable, and that, if the doctrine of bar to change of basic structure is accepted, the amendment has not destroyed any basic structure of the Constitution."

58. While elaborating the extent of power of the Legislature to amend the Constitution by an Act of Parliament our Appellate Division further observed:

"Our Constitution is not only a controlled one but the limitation on legislative capacity of the Parliament is enshrined in such a way that a removal of any plank will bring down the structure itself. For this reason, the Preamble, Article 8, had been made unamendable-it has to be referred to the people! At once Article 7 stares on the face to say: "All power in the Republic belongs to the people", and more, "their exercise on behalf of the people shall be effected only under, and by the authority, of this Constitution" To dispel any doubt it says: "This Constitution is as the solemn expression of the will of the people" You talk of law?-it says: it is the Supreme law of the Republic and any other law inconsistent with this Constitution will be void. The Preamble says "it is our sacred duty to safeguard, protect, and defend this Constitution and to maintain its supremacy as the embodiment of the will of the people of Bangladesh". The constituent power is here with the people of Bangladesh and Article 142(1A) expressly recognises this fact. If Article 26 and Article 7 are read together the position will be clear. The exclusiduary provision of the kind incorporated in Article 26 by amendment has not been incorporated in Article 7. That shows that the 'law' in Article 7 is conclusively intended to include an amending law. An amending law becomes part of the Constitution but an amending law cannot be valid if it is inconsistent with the Constitution. The contention of the Attorney General on the non-obstante clause in Article142 is bereft of any substance because that clause merely confers enabling power for amendment but by interpretative decision that clause cannot be given the status for swallowing up the constitutional fabric. In may be noticed that unlike 1956 Constitution or Sree Lanka Constitution there is no provision in our Constitution for replacing the Constitution. [Para 166]

What the people accepted is the Constitution which is baptised by the blood of the martyrs. That Constitution promises 'economic and social justice' in a society in which 'the rule of law, fundamental human right and freedom and equality and justice' is assured and declares that as the fundamental aim of the State. Call it by any name-'basic feature' or whatever, but that is the fabric of the Constitution which can not be dismantled by an authority created by the Constitution itself-namely the Parliament. Necessarily, the amendment passed by the Parliament is to be tested as against Article 7 [para 195].

The word "amendment" is a change or alteration, for the purpose of bringing in improvement in the statute to make it more effective and meaningful, but it does not mean its abrogation or destruction or a change resulting in the loss of its original identity and character. In the case of amendment of a constitutional provision, "amendment" should be that which accords with the intention of the makers of the Constitution [para-336]

As to the 'constituent power', that is power to make a Constitution, it belongs to the people alone. It is the original power. It is doubtful whether it can be vested in the Parliament, though opinions differ. People after making a Constitution give the Parliament power to amend it in exercising its legislative power strictly following certain special procedures. Constitutions of some countries may be amended like any other statutes following the ordinary legislative procedure. Even if the 'constituent power' is vested in the Parliament the power is a derivative one and the mere fact that an amendment has been made in exercise of the derivative constituent power will not automatically make the amendment immune from challenge. In that sense there is hardly any difference whether the amendment is a law, for it has to pass through the ordeal of validity test. [para-342]

The Constitution of Bangladesh is a controlled one because a special procedure and a special majority-two thirds of the total strength of the Parliament-are required for its amendment. Besides, further limitation has been imposed by amending Article 142 which requires a referendum in certain matters". [para-346]

59. In the light of the above observations, the manner that was adopted by the Legislature prior to enactment of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 and not disputed by the respondents-government, no doubt, raises serious question as to the strict compliance of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament. Thus, makes the intention of the framers of the Act No. 14 of 2011 doubtful. In addition, there is no long title in the amendment Bill of the said Amendment Act, as is required under Article 142(1)(a)(i), which provides as under:

"[     ,  -
()  -     , ,       
   ,
()                           :

"[142. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution-
(a) any provision thereof may be amended by way of addition, alteration, substitution or repeal by Act of Parliament Provided that-
(i) no Bill for such amendment shall be allowed to proceed unless the long title thereof expressly states that it will amend a provision of the Constitution;

60. In view of the above, if the amendment Bill intends to amend more than one Article the long title of the Bill must state the contents of all the Articles, i.e. the long title of the Bill is required to contain reference to all the articles which the Bill intends to amend. The Fifteenth Amendment Bill lacks a long title, as provided under Article 142; thus, has occasioned non-compliance of the mandatory procedural requirement of Article 142.

61. However, fact remains that vide Article 96 of the Constitution, as it stands pursuant to Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011, Supreme Judicial Council has been restored which was subsequently replaced by the Sixteenth Amendment. Later, in 2017 in a landmark judgment our apex court has struck down the Sixteenth Amendment declaring it unconstitutional. Said findings have further been reasserted by the Appellate Division with the dismissal of the review petition, which was filed earlier by the State to overrule the earlier findings. Accordingly, with the restoration of Supreme Judicial Council, autonomy of the judiciary, one of the basic structures of the Constitution, has been re-affirmed.

62. Further, among others, vide Sections 12, 13 and 14 respectively of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 the State has been bestowed with the responsibility to provide protection and improve the environment and to preserve and safeguard the natural resources, bio-diversity, wet lands, forests and wild life for the present and future citizens of the country [Article 18A]; to ensure equality of opportunity and participation of women in all spheres of national life [Article 19(3)]; and to take steps to protect and develop the unique local culture and tradition of the tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and communities [Article 23A].

63. In view of the said context, this Court is not inclined to declare Act No. 14 of 2011, i.e. the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 void in its entirety considering its procedural flaw.

Non-Party Caretaker Government System: Not in the original Constitution of 1972, but is the outcome of the will of the people of Bangladesh who are supreme.

64. As has been observed by the Appellate Division in Anowar Hossain Chowdhury's case: 41 DLR (AD) 165, pp 213, 216:

"It does not need citation of any authority that the power to frame a Constitution is a primary power whereas a power to amend a rigid constitution is a derivative power derived from the constitution and subject at least to the limitations imposed by the prescribed procedure. Secondly, laws made under a rigid constitution, as also the amendment of such a constitution can be ultra vires if they contravene the limitations put on the law-making or amending power by the Constitution, for the Constitution is the touchstone of validity of the exercise of the powers conferred by it. [para-161]

The amending power is but a power given by the Constitution to Parliament; it is a higher power than any other given to Parliament but nevertheless it is a power within and not outside of the Constitution. [para-162]

Our Article 7 has reflected the wisdom of the past and the learning of the history. [para-166]

The amendment therefore recognised the distinction between an ordinary law and a constitutional amendment. Our Constitution is not only a controlled one but the limitation on legislative capacity of the Parliament is enshrined in such a way that a removal of any plank will bring down the structure itself........... The contention of the Attorney-General on the non-obstante clause in Article 142 is bereft of any substance because that clause merely confers enabling power for amendment but by interpretative decision that clause cannot be given the status for swallowing up the constitutional fabric. The Constitution power is here with the people of Bangladesh and Article 142(14) expressly recognises this fact." [para-184]

65. As it reflects from record, in order to fill up a vacancy in the Fifth Parliament a by-election was held in Magura district. The opposition parties, however, alleged massive rigging in the election and started movement for holding election under a non-party caretaker government. Resultantly, they refrained from contesting in the election of the Sixth Parliament and claimed the constitution of the Sixth Parliament to be illegal. In the face of the movement for holding parliamentary election under a non-party interim government, the Sixth Parliament promulgated the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1996 and thereby introducing a non-party caretaker government consisting of one Chief Adviser at its head along with not more than ten Advisers. Said government was to function for a limited period during which parliamentary election was to be held. During the said period the affairs of the government should be run by neutral persons so that no political party could utilise the governmental machinery and resources, monetary or otherwise with a view to influencing the parliamentary election. The care-taker government should function as an interim government and should discharge its routine functions; it should not take any policy decision unless it became necessary for the purpose of carrying out the routine functions: Idrisur Rahman Vs. Bangladesh (2008) 60 DLR 714 (By majority views).

66. However, on 10.05.2011 the Appellate Division declared the system of Non-Party Caretaker Government ultra vires the Constitution prospectively. Nevertheless, the Court vide short order allowed for continuance of the said system for the next 2(two) parliamentary election.

67. The short order passed by the Appellate Division on 10.05.2011 is quoted below:

"It is hereby declared:
(1) The appeal is allowed by majority without any order as to costs.
(2) The Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1996 (Act 1 of 1996) is prospectively declared void and ultra vires the Constitution.
(3) The election of the Tenth and the Eleventh Parliament may be held under the provisions of the above mentioned Thirteenth Amendment on the age old prinicples, namely, quod alias non est licitum, necessitas licitum facit (That which otherwise is not lawful, necessity makes lawful), salus populi suprema lex (safety of the people is the supreme law) and salus republicae est suprema lex (safety of the State is the supreme law).
The parliament, however, in the meantime, is at liberty to bring necessary amendments excluding the provisions of making the former Chief Justices of Bangladesh or the Judges of the Appellate Division as the head of the Non-Party Care-taker Government.
The Judgment in detail would follow.
The connected Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.596 of 2005 is accordingly, disposed of."

68. In this regard, it is pertinent to note that said short order was passed by the Appellate Division on 10.05.2011 and detailed judgment was published on 16.09.2012, i.e. 16 months later. However, the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 was promulgated by the Parliament on 30.06.2011. Fact remains, when the Parliament enacted Fifteenth Amendment Act on 30.06.2011, abolishing the entire Thirteenth Amendment Act vide Sections 20 and 21, had completely ignored the legal position that the short order passed by the Appellate Division dated 10.05.2011 allowing to continue with the Non-Party Caretaker Government system for the next 2(two) terms, i.e.Tenth and Eleventh parliamentary election, was in operation. Moreover, while promulgating the said Act it gave no reference to the judgment and order passed by the apex court to that effect.

69. Thus, there is no doubt to find that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 is squarely contradictory and in violation of the short order passed by the Appellate Division.

70. It is, however, well settled that the basic features of our Constitution are neither amendable nor alterable by the amending power of the Parliament, as has been observed by our apex in Anowar Hussain Chowdhury case, 41DLR (AD) 165, para-293, p-231, (By majority views), which runs as under:

"Now, some of the aforesaid features are the basic features of the Constitution and they are not amendable by the amending power of the Parliament. In the scheme of Article 7 and therefore of the Constitution the structural pillars of Parliament and Judiciary are basic and fundamental. It is inconceivable that by its amending power the Parliament can deprive itself wholly or partly of the plenary legislative power over the entire republic."

71. With this perspective, it is pertinent to quote the observations made by the Appellate Division in the said case while terming "the sovereignty of the people" as one of the basic structures of the Constitution, which runs below:

"Sovereignty belongs to the people and it is a basic structure of the Constitution. There is no dispute about it, as there is no dispute that this basic structure cannot be wiped out by amendatory process. However, in reality, people's sovereignty is assailed or even denied under many devices and "cover-ups" by holders of power, such as, by introducing controlled democracy, basic democracy or by super-imposing thereupon some extraneous agency, such as council of elders or of wisemen. If by exercising the amending power people's sovereignty is sought to be curtailed it is the constitutional duty of the Court to restrain it and in that case it will be improper to accuse the Court of acting as "super-legislators". Supremacy of the Constitution as the solemn expression of the will of the people. Democracy, Republican Government, unitary State, separation of powers, independence of the Judiciary, fundamental rights are basic structures of the Constitution. There is no dispute about their identity. By amending the Constitution the Republic cannot be replaced by Monarchy. Democracy by Oligarchy or the Judiciary cannot be abolished, although there is no express bar to the amending power given in the Constitution. Principle of separation of powers means that the sovereign authority is equally distributed among the three organs and as such one organ cannot destroy the others. These are structural pillars of the Constitution and they stand beyond any change by amendatory process. Sometimes it is argued that this doctrine of bar to change of basic structures is based on the fear that unlimited power of amendment may be used in a tyrannical manner so as to damage the basic structures. In view of the fact that "power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely", I think the doctrine of bar to change of basic structure is an effective guarantee against frequent amendments of the Constitution in sectarian or party interest in countries where democracy is not given any chance to develop" [1989 BLD (Spl) 1, para-377, p-156]

72. Mr. Sharif Bhuiyan, in this regard substantiates his arguments by asserting that the basic structure doctrine as established by the 8th Amendment Judgment are structural pillars of the Constitution and they stand beyond any change by amendatory process. According to the 8th Amendment judgment, he submits, "democracy" is one of the basic structures. People's power or sovereignty of people is another basic structure. The only way these words can be put into practice is by way of free and fair election and peaceful transfer of power. In this connection referring to the results of election being conducted under NPCG system he submits that the elections which were held under the NPCG were accepted as being transparent and free and fair; whereas the other elections which were held not under NPCG system became questionable. Interesting names were given to those elections such as, auto-pass elections, midnight elections and dummy elections.

73. In the given context, he goes to argue that when the Hon'ble Appellate Division in the 8th Amendment judgment held that the basic structure of the Constitution cannot be wiped out by the amendatory process under Article 142 and that democracy is one of the basic structures of the Constitution including the right to vote in public election and of the form of government are fundamental features of the Constitution: [Fazlul Kader Chowdhury v. Mohammad Abdul Hoque (1963) PLD (SC) 486] as such, there is no doubt to say that Non-Party Caretaker Government system has become one of the important structural pillars of the basic structures of the Constitution.

74. While reflecting on the consequence of abolishing the NPCG system by the Fifteenth Amendment he submits that following the abolition of the NPCG system, the nation experienced three consecutive failed elections in 2014, 2018 and 2024. These failed elections ultimately led to the July 2024 students-mass revolution which overthrew the then government on 5 August 2024. In this regard he submits that the entire tragedy that has unfolded in the political arena for the last 15 years and recently, in July-August 2024 following the Fifteenth Amendment is significantly relevant while interpreting the Constitution, because of the principle that the Constitution is a living, organic and evolving document and is like a living tree as it grows and blossoms with the passage of time in order to keep pace with the growth of the country and its people: A.K.M. Shafiuddin Vs. Bangladesh and others: 64 DLR (2012) 508, para- 16.

75. He again contends that a combined reading of the Preamble, and Articles 8 and 11 shows that effective participation of the people in administration can only be ensured if they can elect their representatives through free and fair election. A system that can ensure free, fair, impartial and credible election, which is the foundation and sine qua non for democracy. In other words, a system of free and fair election and democracy are integral part of each other.

76. The NPCG system was incorporated in the Constitution, he goes to argue, for the purpose of ensuring free and fair election and for strengthening democracy and people's power. Said system represented the "will of the people" and a "political consensus and settlement", as it was enacted in the context of the demand of major political parties and the public including the civil society. Thus, when it was included in the Constitution in 1996 it became a "part of the basic structure", and a "fundamental" feature of the Constitution because it ensured free and fair election. Accordingly, as per the basic structure doctrine, the NPCG system cannot be abolished by exercising the amendment power under Article 142 of the Constitution.

77. He also contends that admittedly NPCG system was not in the original Constitution and was introduced through an amendment, for which it cannot be prevented from becoming a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. Likewise, removal of judges through Supreme Judicial Council was not in the original Constitution. It was introduced by the Second Proclamation (Tenth Amendment) Order, 1977 (martial law proclamation) and was, later incorporated into the Constitution by the Fifth Amendment of 1979. However, the Hon'ble Appellate Division in Government of Bangladesh and others. Vs. Advocate Asaduzzaman Siddiqui and others (supra) held that removal of judges through the said Council became a part of the basic structure of the Constitution as it reinforces and ensures a basic structure, namely, the "independence of judiciary".

78. He also goes to contend that in accordance with the 8th Amendment judgment this Hon'ble Court can consider the consequences of abolishing the NPCG system by the Fifteenth Amendment in determining the constitutionality of the said amendment. Accordingly, in interpreting the Constitution or any of its provision, the consequence of the interpretation is very important. Moreso, if the Hon'ble Court construes the NPCG system as unconstitutional, it will also have to consider the consequence, i.e. what is the consequence of holding the NPCG system as unconstitutional. In this regard, the Hon'ble Court has to keep in mind that it is not about merely reading the text and stating that NPCG does not fit well with the constitutional framework. The Hon'ble Court must consider the wider political context, the political consensus, consensus of the citizens and the civil society that was behind the NPCG system and also, the consequences which the nation has experienced since the abolition of the NPCG by the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011. While interpreting the Constitution the Hon'ble Court needs to take into account the events that took place in the social and the political arena. The Hon'ble Court cannot ignore the fact that 1,500 people had to sacrifice their lives and thousands more have become physically disabled, just for a change of government.

79. He again submits that all powers belong to the people and they are supposed to have government of the people, by the people and for the people. Yet, they had to sacrifice their lives to that end! How has the nation got there? The nation got there because of the abolition of the NPCG system by the Fifteenth Amendment. While interpreting the constitutionality of the NPCG system, the Hon'ble Court needs to take the above context into account, requires to interpret the Constitution as a living and evolving document, and must take an approach that is dynamic, progressive and oriented with an objective to meet the demand of the people for restoration of NPCG system.

80. Article 7 ensures the supremacy of the Constitution, as he submits and that the Supreme Court is not only an independent organ of the State, but it also acts as the guardian of the Constitution. It is the Supreme Court that ensures that any law that is inconsistent with the Constitution will be declared void in exercise of the power of judicial review by reference to Article 7(2) of the Constitution. Since Fifteenth Amendment is inconsistent with the Constitution, i.e.the basic structure of the Constitution, this Hon'ble Court is empowered to declare the Fifteenth Amendment void and without any legal effect by reference to Article 7(2) of the Constitution.

81. In this regard, Mr. Fida M. Kamal goes to contend that the Fifteenth Amendment is a colourable legislation due to the fact that the power of the Parliament is limited by the Constitution, and the Parliament is prohibited from passing any laws which are contradictory to the basic structure. At the time of passing the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011, he argues, the Parliament transgressed the limits placed by the Constitution and thereby has achieved an object which was prohibited by the Constitution. The erstwhile government introduced the autocratic system under a colourable legislation and a colourable legislation is void on the principle that what cannot be done directly, cannot also be done indirectly. In Asaduzzaman Case it was held that the Legislature cannot overstep the field of its competence by adopting an indirect means and adoption of such an indirect means to overcome the constitutional limitations is called fraud on the Constitution [71 DLR (AD) 193, para-371]. The Legislature enjoys the discretion to pass any laws, but malafide exercise of discretionary power vitiates everything, and malafide act is a nullity.

82. Supporting the contentions of Mr. Sharif, he goes to argue that omitting the Non-Party Caretaker government system in violation of the apex Court's order and holding the general election in 2014, 2018 and 2024 proves the dishonest intention or corrupt motive in the exercise of power or a deliberate malicious or fraudulent purpose on the part of the Legislature and therefore, taking off the Non-Party Caretaker Government system is an admitted fact of fraud committed on the Constitution 71 DLR (AD) 193, para 372-3741. Furthermore, he submits, the amendment which touches the basic structure of the Constitution is beyond the constitutional power of the Parliament and therefore, should be discarded as a fraud on the Constitution [71 DLR (AD) 243, para-506]. In Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case, para-355, as he contends, it was observed that intention of the makers of a statute is of fundamental. importance, considering the enactment. Moreso, in Sixteenth Amendment Case, it was held that the intention of the framers of the Constitution must be ascertained at the time of judicial review and the Hon'ble Court is empowered to interpret and expound the Constitution. In the said case, it was also held that in a democratic country and under a written Constitution, an amendment is made by the Parliament and not by the Law Minister.

83. In support of the contentions of the petitioners, Mr. Md. Asaduzzaman, the learned Attorney General appearing for the respondent government submits that during the course of hearing of these Rules a question has been raised to the effect that since the Thirteenth Amendment review petition is pending before the Hon'ble Appellate Division, this Division cannot hear the Caretaker Government issue. Raising of such question is a misconceived one, for, he submits, even if the Appellate Division holds that Caretaker Government is intra vires, it will not washed out the amendment so made by the Fifteenth Amendment. In other words, even if the Appellate Division holds that Caretaker Government is ultra vires, even then this Court has the jurisdiction to give decision on the Fifteenth Amendment Act independently inasmuch as the impugned Act No. 14 of 2011 does neither refer the Thirteenth Amendment issue, nor it relies on the Appellate Division judgment passed on the Thirteenth Amendment case.

84. In order to fortify his argument he goes to submit that in Thirteenth Amendment Case, the Appellate Division framed two key issues: (a) whether the 13th Amendment was intra vires or ultra vires; and (b) whether the next two terms would be held under the existing Caretaker Government system or not. On the first issue as to whether the Caretaker Government system is intra vires or ultra vires, out of 7 (seven) Hon'ble judges, 4 (four) said that the Thirteenth Amendment was ultra vires, while the other 3 (three) judges found it to be intra vires. On the second issue as to whether the next two elections would be held under the Caretaker Government or not, it appears from para 2(3) of the Thirteenth Amendment Case that primarily, all the 7 (seven) judges applied the doctrine of necessity and said that next two elections would be held under the Caretaker Government [64 DLR (AD) (2012) p-169, para- 2(3); 16 (sixteen) months later the judgment of the Thirteenth Amendment case had been finally published. However, prior to publication of the final judgment, the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 was promulgated by the Parliament. In the said final judgment, it was found that 3 (three) Hon'ble judges gave verdict to the effect that the next two elections would be held under the Caretaker Government, but the method would be decided by the Parliament. Among the other 4 (four) judges, earlier 3 (three) judges declared it intra vires, and the remaining judge being Mr. Justice Surendra Kumar Sinha dissented with his earlier four piers stating that the next two elections would be held under the Caretaker Government excluding judiciary. Thus, on this issue, he submits, the majority decision affirmed that the next two elections would be held under the Caretaker Government. In consequence whereof, the whole nation suffered and have been disenfranchised.

85. Accordingly, he goes to contend, the pro-tanto Fifteenth Amendment is ex facie a colorable legislation. Moreso, omitting Articles 58A-58E is an act of commission of fraud resulting to hit the basic structure of the Constitution being the rule of law, democracy, human rights and even, touching the independence of judiciary.

86. In this regard, he further goes to argue that the political history in Bangladesh from 1982 to 1990 can be described as the revolutionary period for Caretaker Government system in order to strengthen democracy. In 1970, there was a Parliament under the Constitution of Pakistan and elections were held under the said Constitution. However, during the liberation war of Bangladesh, people rejected Pakistan and its Constitution. People wanted their own territory, they demanded their freedom, human rights, rule of law and independence of judiciary. In the election held in 1970, the people of Bangladesh voiced these aspirations and ultimately, fulfilled their demand by way of liberation war. Finally, the Constitution of Bangladesh was crafted in 1972 referring the "will of the people", as its core foundation. The first election to liberate Bangladesh was held in 1973 under this Constitution. From 1982 to 1990, Bangladesh was ruled under the marshal law suspending/abrogating the Constitution by the military power. During this period, figures like Jafar, Zaynal, Dipali Saha, Kanchan, Rawfun, Bosunia, Nur Hossain, Jihad, Dr. Milon and so on became symbols of resistance; the streets of Dhaka were painted with their fresh blood, they stood before the army's vehicle and on 27.11.1990, when Dr. Milon died during protests against the military regime, the people of Bangladesh determined under which law they would be governed. In this way, he contends, the concept of the Caretaker Government came up through the street movement of the people in 1990. The people on the street made it clear that they were united in their desire for a neutral, free and fair election process. Barrister Syed Istiak Ahmed gave a formula that if the will of people would be taken into consideration and they would have formed a consensus, it would be possible to term an interim government and it should be part of the constitutional structure. Having regard to the said concept, for securing the people's right, political parties came to a consensus that a free, fair and neutral election should be conducted by a neutral government comprised of neutral persons headed by the then Chief Justice of Bangladesh. With the consensus of all, the then Chief Justice resigned, the Hon'ble President appointed him as the Chief Adviser and after conducting election, he would go back to the chair of the Chief Justice. Accordingly, it happened.

87. All these were absent in the Constitution, he submits, but basing on the people's will on the street to materialise the utterance of the people's heart gave birth to the concept of Caretaker Government system to ensure their voting right which is not merely a fundamental right but a constitutional right through a free, fair and neutral election within 3 (three) months. Subsequently, all these systems were ratified by the next Parliament with retrospective effect.

88. In this connection he also submits that voting right through a free and fair election is an integral part of the basic structure as well as to the sovereignty of Bangladesh. The respective Caretaker Governments, introduced in Bangladesh, have conducted 4 (four) elections and all these elections were above criticism and controversy.

89. He also submits that abolishing the Caretaker Government system vide the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 has caused bleeding injuries to the hearts of the people at large. With the repeal of this system, the sovereignty of Bangladesh has been shaken down, the election process has been made a subject matter of external affairs, resulted in the erosion of the constitutional supremacy. Constitutional rule has been gravely compromised, democracy has been destructed and the fundamental rights of the people and rule of law have been severely affected. In consequence whereof the judiciary has been perceived to be controlled by the executive. It has led to political violence and sufferings, the land of this country is stained with the blood of the people. Several national and international human rights reports suggest that around 700 (seven hundred) people were subjected to enforced disappearances, around 4,000 (four thousand) citizens had been killed extra-judicially, around sixty lac people became accused/victims of political persecution. This horrific situation reflects the devastating consequences of the Fifteenth Amendment Act.

90. He further goes to contend that the Caretaker Government system was introduced in the Constitution in order to codify, substantiate, promote and develop our democratic fabric, to strengthen democracy, to bring harmony in the society, to save the constitutional supremacy, to ensure the rule of law and to make the Parliament and government accountable to the people. Fifteenth Amendment Act, specially omitting the Caretaker Government system ex facie hits the basic structure of the Constitution. It is an amendment that suffers from malice in law. If this amendment is kept in the Constitution, it will be a betrayal with the spirit of the liberation war of Bangladesh in 1971 and the people's uprising in 1990. It would be completely contrary to the July-August revolution in 2024.

91. He accordingly, submits that the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 has been promulgated only with a view to prolonging fascism and nothing else and in order to prolong it, the Legislature has involved themselves in committing "crime against humanity" and as such, the impugned Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 may kindly be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

92. Mr. Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar, the learned Senior Counsel appearing with Mr. Zainul Abedin, the learned Senior Advocate on behalf of the Intervener, Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) submits that it is the people who provide legitimacy to the Constitution and the Parliament. Therefore, the Parliament, being the representative of the will of the people, shall have the absolute authority to amend the Constitution without any limitation whatsoever. However, the problematic aspect is that this concept is misapplied when the Parliament is not truly sovereign in its decisions but rather is acting upon the ambitions of some non-democratic authoritarian forces, illegitimately constituted or prejudicial to the common welfare.

93. In this regard, he goes to argue that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011, enacted by the Parliament on 30.06.2011, abolished the Non-Party Caretaker Government system, which was initially incorporated in the Constitution by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment), Act, 1996 to ensure free and fair general elections by a non-partisan interim government. However, the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh while passing the short order dated 10.05.2011 in Asaduzzaman case though declared the Caretaker Government system unconstitutional but allowed its operation for 2(two) more electoral cycles in order to ensure smooth transition of power. However, the full judgment, providing detailed reasoning and legal foundations pursuant to the short order was released on 03.07.2012. In other words, he submits, Act No. 14 of 2011 was promulgated while the short order of the Appellate Division was in operation and in complete derogation thereof.

94. In this connection, he goes to contend that the role of judiciary is to interpret the law and ensure that legislative actions conform to the Constitution. Thus, by enacting the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 before publishing the full judgment, the Parliament has acted malafide, without the benefit of the comprehensive judicial insights into the constitutionality and implications of the Caretaker Government system. This premature legislative action can be seen as undermining the authority of the judiciary and its role in constitutional interpretation, potentially leading to a breach of the constitutional balance of power. Moreso, he submits that the enactment of the Fifteenth Amendment Act prior to release of the full judgment of the Appellate Division can be viewed as unconstitutional. It disregards the essential judicial feedback which was necessary for informed legislative decision-making and undermines the principle of separation of powers among the executive, legislative and judicial branches and are critical to the integrity and functionality of the state's constitutional and democratic processes.

95. The doctrine of separation of powers, as he submits, is a core feature of the constitutional framework of Bangladesh. The caretaker government system, in its original form, was introduced to ensure impartial election oversight, with the judiciary playing a critical role. By removing this safeguard, the Fifteenth Amendment effectively impairs the power of the judiciary and its capacity to act as a check on the executive. Moreover, abolition of the Caretaker Government system significantly affects the democratic process by removing an established mechanism for conducting impartial elections. In a parliamentary democracy, free and fair elections are the cornerstone of governance. The amendment, therefore, raises serious question regarding the constitutional right of the citizens to participate in a fair electoral process. In support he has referred the decision of the case of Amiya Bala Paul V. Bangladesh (2013) where court reiterated that the right to free and fair election is fundamental to a democratic society. Any legislation or amendment that compromises this principle could be considered unconstitutional. Also, in Mohammad Hossain v. Chief Election Commissioner (2005) Case this Hon'ble court affirmed the necessity of impartial election oversight, particularly in a polarized political environment. It established a precedent for the role of Caretaker Government in preserving electoral integrity, as political influence often compromised election credibility. Accordingly, he submits, the abolition of the Caretaker Government system reduces transparency and undermines the people's right to choose their representatives in an impartial setting.

96. He also submits that Article 7 of the Constitution establishes that all power is vested in the people and that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land. The removal of the caretaker government provision, which was a response to public demand for free and fair elections, can be seen as a violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the people of Bangladesh. Referring to the observations so made in Bangladesh Italian Marble Works Ltd. V. Government of Bangladesh (2010) he submits that in the said case this Hon'ble Court reinforced that any constitutional amendment must not infringe upon the people's fundamental rights. It is implied that any legislation or amendment, if found to be inconsistent with the people's rights, can be declared void.

97. Accordingly he submits that the Fifteenth Amendment, by removing the Caretaker Government system has disregarded the people's right to elect their representatives through a fair and impartial process and thereby has undermined Article 7 of the Constitution; hence, it is liable to be declared ultra-vires the Constitution.

98. Mr. Mohammad Shishir Manir, the learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the Intervener, Bangladesh Jammaat-e-Islami opened his argument with the following quote of Mr. Ronald Reagan, the 40th President of the United States of America, "Our Constitution is a document in which We the People tell the government what it is allowed to do. We the People are free."

99. Keeping in view of the core concept of democracy "we, the people" he submits that after the fall of former Ershad government, the concept of Non-Party Caretaker Government was introduced with the consensus of the people. The origin of the demand for Non-party Caretaker Government in Bangladesh can well be found in "       (, ,       ,   , ) and the same was given legal validity by the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act. Thus, it is apparent that demand for Non-Party Caretaker Government had attained people's consensus and it is a proof that though constituent power was absent, will of the people was reflected in the constitution amendment. Subsequently, through the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1996 provision relating to Non-party Caretaker Government was formally inserted in the Constitution.

100. However, in 2012, he submits the Hon'ble Appellate Division in Abdul Mannan Khan vs Government of Bangladesh: 64 DLR (AD) (2012) 169 (famously known as 13th Amendment case) abolished the Non-Party Caretaker Government. However, the Hon'ble Judges of the 13th Amendment Case has failed to weigh the consequences that may follow from their decision. As a result of their failure our people have suffered irreparable loss for the last 15 years. Every constitutional institution has been shattered. There was no free election, there was news that even dead people had reborn to cast vote, no democracy, no freedom of expression, speech or freedom of media, independence of judiciary has been destructed, Election Commission was made puppet of the government, numerous political persecutions occurred, corruption was at its peak, administrative institutions stopped functioning, " " was created. To bring democracy in the country, to stop the dictator and bring the authoritarian regime down, more than thousand people had to sacrifice their lives. The root of all these destruction lies in the abolishment of Caretaker Government. Otherwise, after every five years government would have changed and there would have been a check and balance in the power and nobody could have become a dictator. In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1948, Article 21(3) states: "The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures."

101. He lastly submits that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 was promulgated to establish authoritarianism in the country. On a plain reading of this amendment it becomes abundantly clear that the amendments were brought into action with motive to serve the purpose of the then ruling party who wanted to convey certain ideology to the people.

102. Accordingly, he submits that free and fair election is an inseparable part of democracy and democracy is the basic structure of the Constitution. The Non-Party Caretaker Government being corollary to democracy has attained the status of the basic structure since 1996 and that for free and fair election, Non-Party Caretaker Government has become a dire need of the country.

103. Mr. Subrata Chowdhury, the learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. Mohiuddin Abdul Kadir, the learned Advocate on behalf of the Intervener, Gano Forum, however, submits that the regime that was removed on 5th August by the citizen's uprising led by the students was a regime which was established in violation of the Constitution as there was no free and competitive elections held in 2014, 2018 and 2024 respectively. The citizens' uprising, therefore, did not remove a legal government but removed an illegal and unconstitutional government in order to liberate the nation from an authoritarian, undemocratic and illegal regime and to return to the people of Bangladesh their rights guaranteed by the Constitution.

104. In this regard, he goes to contend that the Preamble to the Constitution of Bangladesh records the historical back ground of the Constitution, the dream of the people and a solemn covenant to fulfil said dream to be achieved by the Constitution. However, it is a matter of great sadness that even after more than half a century of adopting the Constitution the nation failed to achieve the dream of the martyrs who made the ultimate sacrifice dreaming of a prosperous and progressive country with prestige in the international arena. Many of us fail to realize that we break the solemn covenant when we indulge in corruption, discrimination, selfish partisan activities and that is how we tear up and throw away a Constitution which has been described in the case of Anwar Hossain Chowdhury as: "Basic feature' or whatever, but that is the fabric of the Constitution which cannot be dismantled by an authority created by the Constitution itself-namely, the Parliament. Necessarily, the amendment passed by the Parliament is to be tested as against Article 7. Because the amending power is but a power given by the Constitution to Parliament, it is a higher power than any other given by the Constitution to Parliament, but nevertheless it is a power within and not outside the Constitution"

105. He also goes to argue that in a country where there is a written Constitution prescribed by the 'constituent power' it is the Constitution which is the supreme law of the country and the power is distributed equally to three separate branches, namely, the legislature, judiciary and the executive and the power exercised by all the three branches is "constituted power". The Parliament in Bangladesh is not sovereign and any constitutional amendment made in exercise of the constituted power can be challenged as unconstitutional either for not complying with the procedural requirements for amendment prescribed in the Constitution prior to passing of the Bills or for not complying with the various substantive constitutional limits inherent in the Constitution.

106. In the present case, he submits, the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011, no doubt, was passed on 30.06.201lin direct violation of the short order passed by the Appellate Division. However, fact remains, no writ petition was filed challenging the constitutionality of the unconstitutional amendment due to the fear of persecution by the executive and also, due to the loss of faith of the people in the judiciary when the final judgment was passed deviating totally, by majority views, from the short order passed earlier by the apex court. He also submits that the Fifteenth Amendment did not comply with the codified provisions for constitutional amendment as was required under the Constitution prior to 30 June 2011.

107. He substantiated his arguments by submitting further that the Fifteenth Amendment Bill could not be considered for passing by the Parliament as it did not contain the long title as is required under Article 142 of the Constitution. There was also a requirement under Article 142(1B) and (IC) of the Constitution for holding a referendum before the President assented to the Fifteenth Amendment Bill. Due to such clear non-compliance with the requirements, as laid down in Article 142(IA)-142(IC) of the Constitution it is liable to be declared void, non-est and ultra vires the Constitution.

108. He further submits that the 13th Amendment was incorporated in the Constitution for the purpose of ensuring free and fair election and for strengthening democracy, which is the basic feature of our Constitution. In this regard, he goes to submit that there was a consensus of opinion in Bangladesh that free and fair elections cannot be held under the government in power in Bangladesh. The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court declared the 13th Amendment, which made provisions of caretaker government, as prospectively void and following the abolishment of the caretaker government the elections held in 2014, 2018 and 2024 were all marred by corruption and gross irregularity. Consequently, the people did not get a chance to vote.

109. Accordingly, he submits that evidently the 15th Amendment Act, 2011has all the hallmarks of questionable provisions which are against the basic features of the Constitution. It has been passed without complying the mandatory requirements as provided under Article 142(1A), (1B) and 1(C) of the Constitution; hence, it is liable to be declared ultra-vires in view of Article 7 of the Constitution.

110. Mr. Ehsan Abdullah Siddique appearing with Mr. Mohammed Belayet Hossain, the learned Advocates on behalf of Centre for Law Governance and Policy, the Intervener, submits that the Non-Party Caretaker Government (NCG) reinforced the democratic structure of the Constitution of Bangladesh, which is a basic structure of the Constitution; thus, making it's repeal impermissible. In the Sixteenth Amendment Case, he submits, the Appellate Division held that amendments reinforcing basic structures, such as judicial independence, cannot be repealed as doing so would weaken the basic structure of the Constitution. This principle applies to the NCG, as it safeguarded free and fair elections involving broad political participation and strengthening democratic processes. Election without the NCG such as, those which were held in 2014, 2018 and 2024, faced significant controversies, underscoring the NCG's role in upholding democratic integrity.

111. In this regard, he also goes to argue that in Bangladesh v Asaduzzaman Siddiqui, the Appellate Division struck down the Sixteenth Amendment as it had removed the provisions of Supreme Judicial Council and restored the provisions of the original Constitution of 1972. The Appellate Division further held that the amendments introducing the Supreme Judicial Council even though introduced by a martial law amendment, had reinforced a basic structure and could not be repealed. Thus, he submits that the foundations of a legal development which postulates that amendments to the Constitution which bolster or reinforce cannot be repealed.

112. In the Eighth Amendment Case, he submits, democracy has been held to be a basic structure of our Constitution. However, the position of democracy as a feature was reiterated by our apex Court in Asaduzzaman Siddiqui Case in the following words:

"From the constitutional scheme of our Constitution as discussed above, we can safely conclude that democracy, judicial independence, rule of law among others are the basic structures of the Constitution.

113. Accordingly, he submits that the NCG has reinforced the basic structure, i.e. democracy. Hence, following the ratio of the Sixteenth Amendment case, the NCG provisions of the Constitution can no longer be repealed.

114. He further goes to submit that the Non-Party Caretaker Government (NCG) has evolved into a constitutional convention in Bangladesh. Even a single precedent, if rooted in a significant reason, can create such a convention, as affirmed by the Appellate Division. This convention has historically been the basis for the most widely accepted elections. Conversely, failed elections after the NCG's repeal led to the 2024 mass uprising, demonstrating the essential role of caretaker governance. The current interim government, however, mirrors the NCG model, underscoring the enduring nature of this convention even post-repeal. The Non-Party Caretaker Government (NCG) provisions, he submits, enacted in 1996 are the integral part of the Constitution which was created through constituent power- marked by widespread consensus and mass mobilization and since then it has become a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. In the Sixteenth Amendment Case, the Appellate Division reiterated its earlier views in the Eighth Amendment Case and held as follows:

"As to the constituent power, that is, power to make a Constitution it belongs to the people alone. It is the original power.

115. This view is supported by scholars of constituent power such as, Ernst-wolfgang Bockenforde, a former judge of the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany and academic Joel Colon-Rios.

116. In this regard Bockendforde observes: "....only the people can be considered the bearer (subject) of the constituent power."

117. He further observes:

"Once a constitution is constituted and the constituent power has accomplished its task, a constitutional organ-the amendment authority-is granted with the legal competence of revising the constitution. What happens to the constituent power? Since constitutions are embedded within the idea of populism-the liberty of people to shape and reshape their society, the presupposition is that the people always retain the power to establish and change their constitutional order. Therefore, constituted organs, including the amendment process, do not consume the constituent power which is neither exhausted nor bound by the existing constitutional limitations- including explicit or implicit unamendability."

118. Joel Colon-Rios also argues that original constituent power always remains with the people and can be exercised at the appropriate time, when necessary:

"Moreover, both derived and original constitution power can be exercised at any time, and whether to activate the later is harder than to exercise the former (or vice versa) is not necessarily related to their nature A point of distinction between these two notices may be that the exercise of the original constituent power would normally take place in times of popular agitation for constitutional change and through highly participatory procedures. That is to say, the exercise of the derived constituent power merely requires the meeting of certain formalities, while that of the original constituent power requires that any formalities are accompanied by mass mobilization."

119. The doctrine of basic structure, he submits, which protects essential elements like democracy, implies that removing these provisions would destabilize the Constitution. Historical and legal perspective from Indian and European jurisprudence support this view, suggesting that once a constitutional pillar like the NCG is removed, it leads to crisis and undermines democratic integrity. Referring to Eighth Amendment Case, he argues that the NCG provision meets the criteria for basic structure by ensuring constitutional stability and orderly power transfer, showing that without them, the Constitutional risks collapse. Thus, according to Joel Colon-Rios, the amending power can be exercised by observing the formalities of Article 142 and respecting the basic structure of the Constitution. But for an amendment to the Constitution, to be made in exercise of constituent power, "mass mobilization" is necessary.

120. He also submits that the contention of the exercise of constituent power in the framing of the NCG provisions is also supported by Bockenforde's view of constituent power. According to Bockenforde, constituent power arises as a result of special historical- political processes; such as, the massive demand for the NCG in 1996. He observes: "Constitutional history shows, it [constituent power] is brought forth in a specific historical-political process, it is born and shaped by specific forces, and, at times, also abolished by them."

121. In this regard, he also goes to argue that the historical-political process prevailing at the time, i.e.1996 justified the exercise of constituent power in pursuance of which the NCG provisions were framed. Having concluded that the NCG provisions were framed in exercise of constituent power, these provisions now has the same status as the provisions of the original Constitution. The only thing left to be determined is, he contends, whether the NCG provisions having been framed in exercise of constituent power now, have the status of a basic structure of the Constitution. The Appellate Division has already concluded that democracy is basic structure and over the years the NCG has proved to be a structural pillar. When this pillar was removed, the constitutional process of transfer of power was damaged. There was constitutional chaos and massive loss of life. In this regard, he referred to the tests of Sahabuddin Ahmed, J for determining the basis structures, where he holds:

"There is no dispute that Constitution stands on certain fundamental principles which are its structural pillars and if these pillars are demolished or damaged the whole constitutional edifice will fall down. It is by construing their constitutional provisions that these pillars are to be identified."

122. Accordingly, he submits that demolishing the NCG has resulted in the constitutional edifice falling down and has caused the constitutional crises that we are facing today; Shahabuddin Ahmed J's tests for describing the NCG as a basic feature are satisfied; the NCG provisions of the Constitution are one of its basic structures which is unamendable and hence, cannot be repealed under Article 142 of the Constitution.

123. Mr. Abdul Momen Chowdhury as being the conscious citizen of Bangladesh as well as a Senior Advocate of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh has come forward as a Intervener to assist the Court. He submits that the people of Bangladesh have experienced bitter consequence because of the 15th Amendment which has created the foundation of authoritarianism, opened platform for plundering, looting, creating chaos and confusion, indulging in unauthorized torture and killing, controlling all the State machineries including the highest court of the country.

124. He also submits that the impugned 15th Amendment of the Constitution has made the Constitution a family statute for glorifying the slain President by incorporating his speech; it has created scope for interference of the foreign country in the internal affairs of the country. Consequent to the 15th Amendment the election of the Parliament held in 2014, 2018 and 2024 has been polluted in such a manner that it gave continuity to the fascist regime. He further submits that the revolution of Russia, China and Cuba headed by Lenin, Mao Tse Tung and Ho Chi Minh made revolutionary change in the Constitution incorporating the people's aspiration. He accordingly, contends that the tragedy of July and August' 2024 that befell upon the people of the country is the result of people's representatives' authoritarian behavior which caused mischief to such an extent that it cannot be recorded by simple, ordinary and prudent person in a simple book. It will require persons with outstanding ability and expertise to comprehend the massacre, treason, genocide, chaos, confusion and anarchy etc., which were made to happen due to enormous dictatorial power given to the then Prime Minister vide the impugned Act, 2011. Hence, it needs to be declared ultra-vires the Constitution.

125. Mr. Junayed Chowdhury, the learned Advocate has appeared representing four individuals as being the conscious citizens of the country who have been impleaded as Interveners. He, however, submits that under the theory of constitutionalism, there are some "unwritten fundamental values" that must be upheld during any constitutional exercise and in a democratic constitutional setting, one of the "unwritten fundamental values" is democracy: Reference re Secession of Quebec [1998] 2 S.C.R.217 at para. 49, 51, 61 and 64. Failure to uphold these "unwritten fundamental values" like democracy results in substantive unconstitutionality, which means the "result", i.e. "what" is amended will be declared unconstitutional: The Theory and Doctrine of Unconstitutional Constitutional Amendment in Canada, Richard Albert, (2015) 41:1 Queen's LJ 143 at p.190.

126. Mr. Chowdhury in this regard submits that the Constitution of Bangladesh, in fact, makes democracy an express fundamental value (Article 8) and declares the Republic to be a democracy (Article 11). Therefore, any constitutional exercise in Bangladesh like holding elections, which is a precondition to the "due Constitution of Parliament" under Article 124 must always uphold democracy, which has been held by our apex court as one of the basic structures of the Constitution in Anwar Hossain Chowdhury case (supra).

127. He also submits that the Constitution does not define the idea of democracy or its meaning. By citing the Canadian case of Reference re Secession of Quebec [1998] 2 S.C.R. 217 at para. 65, he submits that in constitutional law, democracy is described as the process of representative and responsible government and the right of citizens to participate in the political process as voters. Therefore, in a democratic constitution like Bangladesh, what is to be achieved is creating an orderly framework within which people may make political decisions.

128. Based on the above backdrop, he submits that the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 is in violation of the interveners' fundamental right of freedom of expression guaranteed under Article 39(2)(a) of the Constitution.

129. To substantiate his said argument he submits that the right to vote, even if not a fundamental right, is certainly a constitutional right, as this right originates from and is mandated in Article 122(1) of the Constitution. This right to vote is shaped by the statute, namely, the Representation of the People Order, 1972. In other words, there is a distinction between the statutory right to vote simpliciter and the culmination of that right to vote in the final act of expressing choice towards a particular candidate by means of ballot. Therefore, although the initial right to vote is not a fundamental right but, at the stage when the voter goes to the polling booth and casts his vote, his freedom to express arises, and this casting of vote in favour of one of the election candidates is tantamount to expression of his opinion and preference and that final stage in the exercise of voting right marks the accomplishment of freedom of expression under Article 39(2)(a) of the Constitution. In support he cites the Indian Supreme Court case of People's Union of Civil Liberties v. Union of India: AIR 2003 SC 2363.

130. He also submits that a State has a compelling interest in preserving the integrity of its election process and the peoples' right to vote. This means that confidence in the integrity of the electoral processes is essential to the functioning of a participatory democracy. In other words, voters who fear their legitimate votes will be outweighed by fraudulent ones will feel disenfranchised. In support of this submission, Mr Chowdhury cites the US Supreme Court case of Purcell v. Gonzalez 549 US 1 (2006) at p. 4.

131. Accordingly, he submits that the State has a compelling interest in rooting out the mere "appearance of corruption" in the political process and even if there is an allegation of electoral fraud or corruption (like rigged election), which is left to fester without a robust mechanism to test and disprove it, then it would also drive honest citizens out of the democratic process and breed distrust of the government. In support, he refers the US Supreme Court case of Jake Corman v. Pennsylvania 592 US (2021) at p- 9 citing Purcell v. Gonzalez 549 US 1 (2006).

132. He again goes to contend that the repeal of Non-Party Caretaker Government system through the Fifteenth Amendment Act, especially of Article 58A and Chapter IIA and amendment of Article 123(3) has allowed the political treachery to creep into Bangladeshi politics, which is evidenced by the questionable general elections held in 2014, 2018 and 2024. By referring to European Parliamentary Research Service Briefing titled "Bangladesh and the 2024 elections from 'basket case' to rising star" on December 2023 (under the European Parliament), the Final Report of the European Union Election Expert Mission on the 07 January, 2024 Parliamentary Election, the US Department of State Press Statement dated 08.01.2024, the statement dated 08.01.2024 of the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) of the UK Government following the 2024 election, the Press Statement dated 10.01.2024 of the Australian Government on the 2024 general election, and the 2021 Annual Review of DFID, the UK Government's donor arm, under its Project titled Strengthening Political Participation in Bangladesh, Phase 2 (SPP2), Mr. Chowdhury highlights the fact that the general elections of 2014, 2018 and 2024 were questionable.

133. Thus, he argues that the above state of affairs in the 2014, 2018 and 2024 general elections clearly shows that through the Fifteenth Amendment Act, the people of Bangladesh were deprived of their right to participate in the political process as voters, thereby creating distrust of the government which was amplified by the overthrow of the previous government through the student-led mass protest of July-August 2024 and violating one of the basic structures of the Constitution, i.e. democracy and also, violating the fundamental right of freedom of expression under Article 39(2)(a) of the Constitution.

134. He accordingly, submits that once it is shown that Article 39(2)(a) is violated by the removal of the Non-Party Caretaker Government through the Fifteenth Amendment Act, the provisions of Article 26(2) of the Constitution is triggered under which the State (includes the Parliament under Article 152) shall not make any law inconsistent with any provisions of Part III dealing with the fundamental rights, and any law so made shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.

135. Furthermore, as he contends, if this Hon'ble Court declares the Fifteenth Amendment Act to be unconstitutional, then it must formulate a remedy which is commensurate with the extent of the violation. In this regard, he submits that a just and appropriate remedy is to reinstate the Non-Party Caretaker Government system because said system meaningfully vindicates the people's right to vote and freedom to engage in participatory democracy; said system, being a Caretaker Government, is legitimate within the framework of the constitutional democracy of Bangladesh. Moreso, the Non-Party Caretaker Government system is a judicial remedy which vindicates the people's constitutional right to democratic participation while invoking the powers and function of this Hon'ble Court under Article 102 of the Constitution; and that the Non-Party Caretaker Government system is fair to the incumbent government to hold a free and fair election.

136. Mr. Chowdhury concludes his submissions by inviting this Court to remember that the student-led mass protest of July-August 2024, like the Pandora's Box, has engulfed the country with tremendous amounts of anger, dissatisfaction and demands. But, like the last element that came out of the Pandora's Box is that the entire nation now looks to 'hope' - the hope that Bangladesh will one day come out of this political turmoil and recognise one of the most basic constitutional rights of her citizens' - the right to vote in a safe environment under a free and fair election, the result of which will remain beyond reproach.

137. Mr. Mostafa Asgar Sharifee, the learned Advocate-Intervener (In person), however, submits that a Constitution is a formal agreement among individuals in a society to form a State and to establish its organs defining their powers, obligations, and limits, reflecting the collective will to secure mutual benefits like order, security, and justice. From this perspective, a Constitution embodies the terms of social contract, where citizens surrender certain freedoms to the State in exchange for protection of their rights and promotion of the common good. From the perspective of social contract theory, the Preamble and Article 7 of the Constitution of Bangladesh are pivotal in articulating the agreement among the people to establish a sovereign state, define the terms of governance, and ensure the government operates with their consent. Social contract theory, as envisioned by thinkers like Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau posits that individuals collectively agree to establish a sovereign state, surrendering certain freedoms in exchange for protection of rights.

138. He further goes to submit that it is high time to reassess the doctrine of basic structure after the successful uprising occurred in July 2024. If the basic structure doctrine had not been adopted in Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case constitutional amendments and developments would have occurred through political processes within Parliament. This would have enabled democratic institutions to evolve naturally in line with changing societal values, allowing for a more organic and representative constitutional development. However, judicial supremacy, one of the basic structures of the Constitution, contradicts Article 7, i.e. people's power. As such, the court should reject this doctrine to enable reforms that align with the uprising's vision of a politically responsive Constitution.

139. He further contends that the cost of July 2024 uprising, with approximately 2,000 lives lost and thousands permanently disabled, was a direct consequence of the judiciary's invalidation of the 8th Amendment, 5th Amendment and 13th Amendment cases, which enabled the 15th Amendment's authoritarian measures and a fascist regime's 15-year rule. This violation of popular sovereignty under Article 7, by undermining democratic consent through electoral fraud, necessitated the people to revolt in order to restore their constitutional authority. Continued judicial reliance on the basic structure doctrine risks enabling future authoritarian regimes to exploit similar rulings, leading to prolonged oppression and further uprisings with devastating human tolls. Constitutional practices must uphold popular sovereignty through political processes, such as referendum, to address the 15th Amendment's flaws, ensuring that the people's will, not judicial intervention, shapes the Constitution to prevent such cycles of tyranny and sacrifice.

140. Lastly, he submits that the July uprising was a manifestation of the people's desire for change and a move towards greater accountability. If the basic structure doctrine continues to dominate, it may obstruct the possibility of achieving political settlements that could address the root causes of discontent and foster a more inclusive and participatory political environment; thus, perpetuating cycles of unrest. The continued adherence to the basic structure doctrine may impede the opportunities created by the July uprising for genuine democratic reform; ultimately, increasing the risk of another autocratic government emerging in Bangladesh.

141. Ms. Sonia Zaman Khan, as being the conscious citizen of Bangladesh as well as an Advocate of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh has been impleaded as Intervener to assist the Court on the issue of repealing the Non-Party Caretaker Government system and the effect of the said repeal in the exercise of the right of franchise of the respective citizens of the country.

142. In this regard, she goes to argue that Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 did away with the Non-Party Caretaker Government system in Bangladesh which allowed a non-partisan government to hold general elections in Bangladesh within 90(ninety) days upon expiration of the term of a government. Consequent to obliteration of the said system of government from the Constitution, Bangladesh lost hope for free and fair elections and fell under an undemocratic and tyrannical rule.

143. In order to substantiate her argument learned counsel submits that peaceful transition of power, ruling by consent, free and fair elections, universal suffrage are usual elements of democracy. In this connection she goes to contend that every nation is different from the other and the more we research about democracies, the more we realise that it is not only difficult to define democracy, but is also naive to think that precise modes of governance can be prescriptive or superimposed worldwide. Broadly speaking, the idea of democracy involves a sharing of power and processes of participation by many stakeholders. According to John Morison (2008: 303-304), "everyone affected by a decision has a right to participate in the decision-making process". Democracy, as she submits, fundamentally is a struggle over power and an agreement to share power by a defined group of people, provides an entirely different experience for those who are elected into positions of power which they then hold, and those who do not. This may be perceived at two levels, namely, in the power struggles between government and opposition and in the relations between governments and citizens.

144. The Non-Party Caretaker Government of Bangladesh, as she argues, despite all the political conundrums, clearly provided a response to the first element of such basic failures of participation, by creating a free and fair environment, a level playing field, where the electorate could participate in exercising their basic right to vote during elections. The voter turn-out rate, during such democratic transition, was encouraged by the sheer knowledge of the masses that an election conducted by a caretaker regime is not a sham but a genuine opportunity for participation. It generated considerable trust.

145. She further goes to submit that with established democracies, institutional procedures of democracy such as, an autonomous Election Commission, a more or less accurate and up-to-date electoral register, reliable ballot boxes, the integrity of Returning Officers in counting votes, or that there has been no effort to purchase votes or vote rigging, that there is no election-related violence or deaths, or that Returning Officers, due to their political allegiance, are not strategically transferred in polling stations are factors which are so basic that such questions about them usually do not arise.

146. In this regard, referring to the concept of democracy by Habermas, a famous German philosopher and social theorist, she submits that democracy cannot be equated with any particular set of institutional mechanisms such as, voting, separation of powers or representation. Rather, it is an institutional order whose legitimacy depends on "collective will-formation through discourse". Accordingly, she quotes the following words of Habermas (1979: 186).

"Democracy is a question of finding arrangements which can ground the basic presupposition that the basic institutions of the society and the basic political decisions would meet with the unforced agreement of all those involved, if they could participate, as free and equal, in discursive will-formation. Democracy is the kind of politics that favours discursively mediated consensus over other ways of making collective decisions, namely by means of coercive authority, the authority of traditional or other non-discursively created identities or the authority of the markets."

147. She also goes to submit that Constitution as unfinished projects are constantly amended and revised. They are part of a self-correcting constant learning process in which a society further develops the commitments made by the earlier generations. These commitments are implicit within a discursive conception of democratic law making. They are guarantees of autonomy for all citizens, both in the public, political realm and private, personal one. This unfolding of basic commitments takes the form of an increasingly sophisticated system of constitutional rights. She offers to view democracy as theoretically 'unrestricted' and unlimited liberty of 'will formation' enjoyed as vested right by the 'united citizens'.

148. The caretaker system of governance under the Constitution of Bangladesh, she argues, for example, made its entry into the constitutional text following an upsurge of popular support. Nevertheless, its introduction could not be fully described as a democratic act. It arose initially as a kind of informal agreement between the various political protagonists to address a particular predicament, namely how to get rid of military rule. However, the paradoxical relation between democracy and the rule of law or will formation and constitutionalism resolves itself in the dimension of historical time, provided one conceives the Constitution as a project that makes the founding act into an ongoing process of constitution-making that continues over time and possibly even across generations. The Caretaker Government in Bangladesh is clearly an unelected body that governs the State for an interim period, which is a new dimension to politico-legal philosophy of transition to democracy, and yet it is thought to be the outcome of the will of the people due to the social and political reality of time, despite appearing to be opposed to the politics of electoral democratic principles.

149. She further contends, the electorates of Bangladesh does not want to have the accolades of a failing State, though the right kind of thinking, the right kind of leadership which would take the nation forward, at a pace the nation wants, having the quality the nation wants, is regrettably amiss. The Caretaker government system has now been demolished. As the whole country is manifestly held to ransom by many types of petulant abuses of power, the top figures of leadership, as potential role models of good governance have failed their own country and the electorate and ruin the peaceful sailing of the people of Bangladesh and its democracy in the last 16 years. The only way forward is to create a government that acquires legitimation on the basis of the "will of the people".

150. As she argues, it is apparent on the face of records as well as experienced by the nation that upon enactment of the Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution, all institutional structures of the country including the judiciary, the Election Commission, the police and rule of law and constitutional governance have been destroyed. As such, this amendment in addition to the procedural impropriety under Article 142 of the Constitution, in public interest, ought to be declared to be ultra vires the Constitution.

151. Democracy and free and fair election are inseparable twins. As has been observed earlier, the Constitution is the rule of recognition with reference to which the validity of all laws including the constitutional amendments will have to be examined. An amendment of the Constitution is not a grundnorm because it has to be according to the method provided in the Constitution. Total abrogation of the Constitution, which is meant by destruction of its basic structure cannot be comprehended by the Constitution. The Constitution remains at the apex because it is the supreme law-it remains sui generis only so long it is accepted by the people: 41 DLR (AD) 165 para-218, p-221. Further, it has been observed;

"We are relieved of the anxiety as to whether the Preamble is a part of the Constitution or not as it has been the case in some other country. Article 142(14) stipulates that a Bill for amendment of the Preamble and provisions of Articles 8, 48, 56, 80, 92A and Article 142 when passed in the Parliament and presented to the President for assent" the President shall within the period of seven days after the Bill is presented to him, cause to be referred to a referendum the question whether the Bill should or should not be assented to". Hence the Preamble can only be amended by referendum and therefore is a part of the Constitution. Few Constitutions do have such a Preamble. Its amenability is rigidly protected which can only be done by the people at a referendum. in our Constitution the Preamble can only be altered by the people because our Constitution has proceeded from the people and it is not rhetorical flourish" [41 DLR (AD) 165, para-53, 54, 55, p-197].

152. The Preamble of our Constitution reflects the objectives of the Constitution declaring the people to be the source of power as well as the Constitution itself. It pledged that the high ideals of nationalism, socialism, democracy and secularism to be the fundamental principles of the Constitution. It declared that the fundamental aim of the State is to realize a socialist society, free from exploitation through democratic process- a society in which the rule of law, fundamental human rights and freedom, equality and justice, political, economic, and social, will be secured for all citizens. Said concept is further fortified with the declaration of the fundamental principles of State Policy, as set out in Part II of the Constitution, which shall be applied by the State while promulgating law keeping in view of the social, economic and political concepts of Bangladesh and shall be fundamental to the governance of Bangladesh, a guide to interpretation of the Constitution and other laws: [Article 8(2) of the Constitution].

153. However, while discussing the features of basic structures the Appellate Division in the 8th Amendment case had taken into consideration the case of Smt. Indira Gandhi Vs. Raj Narain, AIR 1975 SC 2299 where the validity of the Constitution 39th Amendment Act, 1971 was challenged. The Supreme Court of India while declaring the said Amendment Act invalid, found that the amendment had violated "the principle of free and fair election" which is an essential postulate of democracy-which is in its turn a part of the basic structure of the Constitution: 41 DLR (AD) 165 para-358 p- 248. Ultimately, our Appellate Division has categorically found democracy as the basic structure of the Constitution, which cannot be wiped out by the amendatory process under Article 142: 1989 BLD (Special) 1 para-377, p- 156].

154. Democracy, in our Constitution, refers to denote "People's power". It stands for the actual, active and effective exercise of power by the people. Democracy means the ability of the people to choose and dismiss a government. In the present context, it refers to the political participation of the people in running the administration of the government. It conveys the state of affairs in which each citizen is assured of the right of equal participation in the polity. R.C. Poudyal Vs. Union of India and others. (1994) Supp 15CC 324.

155. It is already established through the process of time that democracy is established through the process of free and fair election, i.e. the right to vote in public election without any hindrance, without any interference, without any undue influence, be it political or administrative, towards formation of a democratic government, being represented by the people selected by the respective voters. Further, Article 11, one of the fundamental principles of State policy also ensures that "the Republic shall be a democracy.... in which effective participation by the people through their elected representatives in administration at all levels shall be ensured".

"Thus, free, fair and periodic elections are part of the Constitution. Democracy and free and fair elections are inseparable twins. There is almost inseverable umbilical cord joining them. The little man's ballot and not the bullet is the heart beat of democracy........". Special Reference No.1 of 2002, Ref by President, AIR 2003 SC 87.

156. In other words, democracy and free and fair election are part of our Constitution and are fundamentally one of the important basic structures of the Constitution.

157. Non-party Caretaker Government system, a part of the basic structure of the Constitution since 1996 in view of the "will of the people". - Admittedly, Non-Party Caretaker Government system was not in the original Constitution, it was introduced in the Constitution vide the Constitution (Thirteen Amendment) Act, 1996 materialising the voice of the people of Bangladesh who shed blood on the street with aspiration and demand to be governed under the rule of law, with freedom to exercise their right to choose their choice of representatives under a free and fair election and thereby to strengthen their will guaranteed under Article 7, "the pole star of the Constitution".

158. If the historical background, the Preamble, the entire scheme of the Constitution, the relevant provisions thereof including Article 142 are kept in mind there can be no difficulty to discern that Non-party Caretaker Government system being intertwined with democracy became part of the basic structure of the Constitution since 1996 on the consensus of the major political parties and the public including the civil society, reflecting the "will of the people" to have "free and fair election" with "political consensus and settlement". The system which was introduced and made part of the Constitution to strengthen our democracy, rule of law, independence of judiciary and other allied basic structures of the Constitution.

159. Consequence of obliteration of the Non-Party Caretaker Government system.- It is well settled that the doctrine of basic structure cannot be rejected if consequence of its rejection is taken into consideration: 41 DLR (AD) 165, p-251, para 368. It is the categorical findings of the apex court that our Constitution is not only a controlled one but the limitation on the legislative capacity of the Parliament is enshrined in such a way that a removal of any plank will bring down the structure itself: 41DLR (AD) 165, p-216, para-184. The amending power of the Parliament is but a power given by the Constitution to the Parliament; it is a higher power than any other given by the Constitution to Parliament, but nevertheless it is a power within and not outside the Constitution: 41 DLR (AD) 165, p-222, para 220.

160. Considering the above, if we give a glance at the consequence of abolishing the Non-Party Caretaker Government system by the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 the result is: the three consecutive elections which were held in 2014, 2018 and 2024 in the absence of the said system have failed to demonstrate public confidence that those were held freely and fairly ensuring the right of franchise of the respective voters. Whole world witnessed disenfranchisement of the citizens in particular. Ultimately, it led to July-August, 2024 a nationwide student-mass revolution involving sacrifice of the lives of thousands of people including thousands of people becoming physically disabled permanently, just for a change of government. Eventually, the erstwhile government had to step down from power leading to formation of an interim government under extraordinary circumstances which does not base its root in the Non-party Caretaker Government system but backed by the reference of the Appellate Division under Article 106 of the Constitution and the people at large.

161. Now, the entire focus or demand of the nation is for establishing a system which will effectively ensure free, fair and impartial election for protecting democracy, rule of law, and independence of judiciary, which can be held only under a Non-Party Caretaker Government system, which will pave the way for a new democracy, a new hope, new freedom and a new Bangladesh.

162. At this juncture, we must remember, if the Constitution is to endure it needs to respond to the will of the people by incorporating the changes demanded by the people. The needs of the nation may call for severe abnegation, though the needs of the evolutionary changes in the fundamental law of the country do not necessarily destroy the basic structure of its government. At the end of the day, what does the law live for, if it is dead to the living needs: Kuldip Nayar vs. Union of India and others: AIR 2006 SC 3127.

163. In view of the above, it is unequivocally found by this court that since the Parliament, being a legislative body, is devoid of power to amend the Constitution which touches the basic structure of the Constitution and as such, repealing Article 58A along with Chapter IIA relating to Non-Party Caretaker Government by Sections 20 and 21 of the Act No.14 of 2011, i.e. Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 is hereby declared ultra vires the Constitution and hence, is void with prospective effect. Resultantly, Sections 20 and 21 of the Act, 2011 are hereby declared void.

164. Repealing referendum under Article 142 without referendem.- Article 142, as it stood in the original Constitution of 1972, is quoted below:

"     
     ,  
()  -         ;
   ,
()                               ;
()   -  -               ;
() -                     ,                "

165. Subsequently, in 1973 it has been amended in the following terms:
   
 ()     ,  
()  -     , ,       ;
   , ()                           ;
() (As it was in 1972)
() (As it was in 1972) "

166. In 1979, Article 142 has further been amended, which runs as under:
"   
() (As it was in 2nd Amendment in 1973).
() ()    ,       , ,,,                -                           
()                          
()             
()              ,       , 
()               ,        

167. Subsequently, in 1991 it has been amended in the following terms:
"   
 () (As it was in 5th Amendment in 1979).
() ()    ,       ,               -                            
()                         
() (As it was in 5th Amendment in 1979)
() ()              
()             

168. After impugned amendment vide Act No. 14 of 2011, Article 142 stands as under:

   
(     ,  
()        , ,       
   ,
()                           :
()      -               :
() -                     ,                

"Power to amend any provision of the Constitution
"[142. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution-
(a) any provision thereof may be amended by way of addition, alteration, substitution or repeal by Act of Parliament:
Provided that-
(i) no Bill for such amendment shall be allowed to proceed unless the long title thereof expressly states that it will amend a provision of the Constitution;
(ii) no such Bill shall be presented to the President for assent unless it is passed by the votes of not less than two thirds of the total number of members of Parliament;
(b) when a Bill passed as aforesaid is presented to the President for his assent he shall, within the period of seven days after the Bill is presented to him assent to the Bill, and if he fails so to do he shall be deemed to have assented to it on the expiration of that period.] "

169. It is, thus, apparent that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has purported to amend the Preamble, Articles 8, 48, 56 and Article 142 itself of the Constitution including referendum. However, vide Article 142(1A), as it then was vide Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 a referendum was mandatory to be conducted by the Election Commission with the assent of the Hon'ble President of the Republic for bringing any amendment of the Preamble or any provisions of Articles 8, 48 or 56 or this Article, i.e. Article 142. The Legislature vide the Fifteenth Amendment has amended Article 142 repealing all provisions relating to referendum, i.e. sub-articles (1A)-(1D) and (2) of Article 142, without conducting referendum.

170. Now, the question remains, whether referendum was required under Article 142 prior to making amendment of Article 142 vide the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011.

171. Sub-articles (1A), (1B) and (1C) of Article 142 as to referendum was incorporated in the Constitution by the 2nd Proclamation (15th Amendment) Order, 1978 (2nd Proclamation Order No. IV of 1978), which was subsequently ratified, confirmed and validated by the Fifth Amendment Act, 1979. Later, Fifth Amendment Act, 1979 was declared unconstitutional by the Appellate Division in Khondaker Delwar Hossain, Secretary, BNP and another Vs. Bangladesh Italian Marble Works and another: 62 DLR (AD) 298 (popularly known as 5th Amendment judgment) vide judgment and order dated 01.02.2010. However, the referendum of Article 142 was subsequently approved by the Fifth Parliament vide Section 19 of the Constitution (Twelfth Amendment) Act on 18.09.1991. Fact remains, Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 omitted Articles 58, 80 and 92A, as were included in sub-article (1A) of Article 142 vide the Fifth Amendment Act, 1979.

172. In this regard, Mr. Sharif Bhuiyan, Mr. A.S.M. Shahriar Kabir, including the learned Attorney General in one voice submit that in the Sixteenth Amendment Case [71 DLR (AD) para 208-215, pp-153-155] our apex court highlighted the importance of referendum and ratification. In the said paragraph their Lordships categorically upheld that if any Act or amendment or any international treaty is ratified by or passed by a referendum, that is obligatory for the Parliament to obey. In this regard it has been contended that before the promulgation of Fifth Amendment, the then government placed a referendum and on basis of the referendum, the Fifth Amendment Act was passed; but this Hon'ble Court in the 5th Amendment Case declared the said amendment void. However, in the Thirteenth Amendment Case, [64 DLR (AD) para-70, pp-187 and 197] the Appellate Division observed, inter-alia, that "                               In paragraph 191, it was further observed that "        ,                                             " But, the said case did not discuss elaborately the reasons for making the referendum redundant.

173. Also, it has been argued that the Twelfth Amendment was passed vide Act No.28 on 18.09.1991 and by the said Amendment, the provision of referendum in Article 142 in the Fifth Amendment was replaced and recast. Till date, there is no judicial pronouncement declaring the Twelfth Amendment ultra vires or repugnant to the Constitution. As such, under the substituted Article 142 by the Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 referendum is mandatory, and without referendum, the Preamble, or any provision of Articles 8, 48, 56 or even, Article 142 of the Constitution cannot be amended. Moreso, as they argued, under the settled principle of law, basic structure of the Constitution cannot be changed, altered or amended without referendum. The Parliament ought to have conducted a referendum for passing the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 and without referendum, the Fifteenth Amendment is ultra vires the Constitution.

174. In support of the said contentions, Mr. Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar, the learned Senior Counsel adds by submitting that the provision of referendum for amending Preamble, Articles 8, 48 and 56 is not only a ceremonial issue, it got effected by the referendum held on 15th September, 1991 for the ratification of the Twelfth Amendment of the Constitution and in line with that " , " was promulgated and is still in force. As such, without referendum of the Constitution there was no scope for amendment of Preamble, Part I, Part II and other provisions of the Constitution that give rise to basic structure; hence, it should be struck down.

175. He also goes to argue that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has been purportedly made under Article 142 of the Constitution where there were specific provisions for referendum in case of amending certain articles of the Constitution including the Preamble. Article 7B has been inserted by making certain articles unamendable whereas Article 7B was inserted under Article 142 of the Constitution and the same Article 142 has been amended by the same Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011. Is it not putting the cart before the horse? By this way, he submits, a serious parliamentary fraud has been committed.

176. There is no doubt, as he submits, that the Constitution should not be changed for light or transient causes, but when weighty reasons appear, at those times veneration for antiquity must not hold them back. However, the Constitution was never thought to be a perfect document. It is the solemn expression of the will of the people. No one ever intended that all generations to come should abide by the same fundamental principles or basic features of the Constitution of today for all time to come.

177. This amending provision, he goes to argue, is the very ground that allowed this country to revert from one party rule to a multi-party rule, from presidential government to the parliamentary form, from a no woman representation to ensured women seats. The amending power of the Constitution is the power to salvage this country from crisis as it did once when the Non-Party Caretaker Government was incorporated in the Constitution. The people should be taught to defend the Constitution and not to circumvent it, as is reflected in the wordings of Robert Browning, in Rabbi Ben Ezra, "The best is yet to be, the last of life, for which the first was made".

178. Accordingly, he submits that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 without adherence to mandated referendum process under Article 142, which enshrines the principle of "we, the people", constitutes a profound democratic deficit; as such, this amendment should be struck down in its entirety.

179. In support of the contentions of the petitioners Ms. Ishrat Hasan, the learned Advocate appearing with Mr. Md. Abdur Rouf, the learned Advocate on behalf of the Intervener, Insaniyat Biplob Bangladesh goes to submit that before Fifteenth amendment, referendum was mandatory for amending Preamble, Articles 8,48, 56 and 142. The Fifteenth Amendment brought changes to the Preamble, Articles 8 and 142 without resorting to any referendum; thus, violated the constitutional provision as well as the sovereign power of the people to decide whether they at all want such drastic and fundamental changes to the Constitution. By this amendment the Parliament has upgraded itself into a constituent assembly at the detriment of the will of the people. Moreso, it is the general principle of parliamentary law that a future parliament is never bound by its predecessor except in the following manner and form. Accordingly, she submits that the impugned amendment having been made in violation of the Constitution itself is liable to be declared ultra-vires the Constitution.

180. Power of amendment under Article 142 is subject to Article 7 of the Constitution. Article 142 of the Constitution deals with the power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution by way of addition, alteration, substitution or repeal by Act of Parliament subject to compliance of the mandatory procedures as prescribed therein. The word "amendment" has to be construed considering Article 7 of the Constitution which provides that this Constitution is the solemn expression of the will of the people of Bangladesh. As such, an "amendment" of the Constitution must conform to the democratic pattern as envisaged by the Constitution. Here, the power which the Parliament may exercise is not the power to override the constitutional scheme.

181. The reason for making provision for the amendment of the Constitution is the need for orderly change in accordance with the Constitution. If, however, the change in the constituted instrument fails to respond to the will of the people in changed conditions and is posed as the stumbling block in their progress to reform it will be looked upon with distrust by the people and shall hardly have a chance to survive against the will of the people.

182. Fact remains that challenging the Fifth Amendment Act, 1979 writ petition No.6016 of 2000 was filed after the enactment of Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991. In the respective judgments and orders, however, neither the High Court Division nor the Appellate Division made any observation on the amendment of Article 142 which took place by the Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991. Hence, in view of the Constitution (Twelfth Amendment) Act, 1991 the need for referendum arises independently for making amendment of Article 142 in order to carry out the will of the people.

183. As has been observed earlier, vide the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 the Parliament in exercise of power as provided in Article 142 has amended, among others, Article 142 itself so far it relates to the provision of referendum, i.e. sub-articles 1A-1D of Article 142 without conducting referendum; thus, negates the expression of the will of the people.

184. Consequently, without holding referendum amending Article 142 in order to omit referendum is repugnant to the Constitution; hence, is void being ultra vires the Constitution.

185. Accordingly, Section 47 of the Act No. 14 of 2011 vide which Article 142 of the Constitution, so far it relates to excluding the provision of referendum, is hereby declared void. Resultantly, Article 142 of the Constitution as it has been incorporated vide the Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 is hereby restored.

186. Article 7A and 7B:
Article 7 of the Constitution has been termed by our Appellate Division as the "pole star" of the Constitution in the 8th Amendment Case where it has been emphatically declared that all powers in the Republic belong to the people. Thus, it establishes the concept of sovereignty of the people, which is reflected in the wordings of the Preamble "We, the People of Bangladesh", whose will is the supreme.

187. While analyzing Article 7 our apex court observed, inter-alia, at p-214, para-167 of 41 DLR (AD) 165:

"Law as defined in Article 152 means any Act, ordinance, order, rule and regulations by law, notification or other legal instruments and any custom or usage having the force of law in Bangladesh. Article 7 says that if any law is inconsistent with the Constitution that law shall to the extent of inconsistency be void. When Article 26 says about the inconsistency of any law with the fundamental rights to be void, Article 7 operates in the whole jurisdiction to say that any law and that law includes also any amendment of the Constitution itself because Article 142 says that amendment can be made by Act of Parliament. Therefore, if any amendment which is an Act of Parliament contravenes any express provision of the Constitution that amendment act is liable to be declared void. So says Article 7."

188. In the 8th Amendment case, an argument had been advanced by the then learned Attorney General that amending power is a constituent power, not legislative power; as such, the Parliament has unlimited power to amend the Constitution invoking its constituent power. While negating the said proposition the Appellate Division observed as follows:

"The Constituent power is here with the people of Bangladesh and Article142 (14) expressly recognizes this fact. the "law" in Article 7 is conclusively intended to include an amending law. An amending law becomes part of the Constitution but an amending law cannot be valid if it is inconsistent with the Constitution. No Parliament can amend it because Parliament is the creation of this Constitution and all powers follow from this article namely, Article 7......." [41 DLR (AD) 165, para 184, 207, pp-216, 220].

189. The apex court in its observation has also found "sovereignty of the people, supremacy of the Constitution, democracy, republican government, unitary state, separation of powers, independence of the judiciary and fundamental rights", as the basic structures of the Constitution.

190. Does Article 7A infringe upon the right to freedom of speech and expression? Article 7A has been incorporated by the Parliament after Article 7, by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011. Said Article is quoted below for ready reference:

  , ,  
()        d  Ae    -
()       ,               ;

()         ,              -
           
()   ()  -
()        ; 
()  , ,    -
     
()                  "

"7A. Offence of abrogation, suspension, etc. of the Constitution
(1) If any person, by show of force or use of force or by any other un-constitutional means-
(a) abrogates, repeals or suspends or attempts or conspires to abrogate, repeal or suspend this Constitution or any of its article;
or
(b) subverts or attempts or conspires to subvert the confidence, belief or reliance of the citizens to this Constitution or any of its article,
his such act shall be sedition and such person shall be guilty of sedition.
2) If any person-
(a) abets or instigates any act mentioned in clause (1); or
(b) approves, condones, supports or ratifies such act,
his such act shall also be the same offence.
(3) Any person alleged to have committed the offence mentioned in this article shall be sentenced with the highest punishment prescribed for other offences by the existing laws."

191. On a plain reading of Article 7A it is apparent that the said provision, in particular Article 7A(1)(a) and (b) contain some vague terms like, "   ",  " ,     " "        ", which shall be termed as "sedition" or "" and the person accused of shall be guilty of sedition with imposition of highest punishment, as prescribed in the existing laws.

192. In this regard, Mr. Sharif goes to contend that the vagueness of Article 7A surpasses all acceptable standards and permissible limits which has been incorporated with sole purpose, i.e. to establish authoritarianism, as is reflected in Article 7A. While elaborating his argument he submits that Article 7A has been included in the Constitution so that everything done by the Parliament and the Executive is immune from any criticism or protest. If anyone protests, then the person can be prosecuted under Article 7A.

193. Article 7A(2) is even more vague, he submits, according to Article 7A(2), providing "  " or " , ,   " in respect of the offence in Article 7A(1), is a separate offence. Thus, 7A(2) has multiple layers of vagueness, for, it adds a number of additional vague provisions over an already vague original provision.

194. Also, he goes to contend that Article 7A(3) prescribes highest punishment that is prescribed in Bangladesh for "other offences". In which case the punishment, perhaps will be the "death penalty". Thus, while the Penal Code prescribes one punishment for sedition, Article 7A creates an offence of sedition and prescribes a different penalty but does not clearly specify the same.

195. In other words, he submits, Article 7A has created a vague offence and sought to impose "punishment" for the vague offence, but has not defined the "punishment" and has not specified the forum or court who will try the offence. Thus, Article 7A is nothing but a constitutional device for flouting the rule of law and for the midnight knock on the door, the enforced disappearance, the mass arrest and arbitrary detention, the subjection of prisoners to torture, the show trial, the crimes against humanity and so on.

196. To fortify his said argument he has referred the decision of the case of Shreya Singhal Vs. Union of India: AIR 2015 (SC) 1523 where the petitioner challenged the validity of Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 of India on the ground, among others, that the expressions used in Section 66A are vague and not defined. The Indian Supreme Court considered various standards laid down by courts in various jurisdictions to assess the legality of a penal provision and held that Section 66A was void because "the expressions used in Section 66A are completely open ended and undefined". Accordingly, he submits that Article 7A being repugnant to the basic structure of the Constitution is liable to be struck down.

197. In support of the contentions of Mr. Sharif Bhuiyan, Mr. Fida M. Kamal adds, Article 7 is the "pole-star" of our Constitution which contains the fundamental premises of a democratic government to which the people had pledged in the Preamble. The principles as expressed in and derived from this Article are so basic and fundamental that Article 7 is unalterable and beyond change. Moreso, the said provision provides that if any law is inconsistent with the Constitution that law shall to the extent of inconsistency be void. Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case reaffirms the principle that, Article 7 is the touchstone and any amendments passed by the Parliament should be in conformity with the said Article. However, Article 7A, he submits, is a new version of political oppression which opens the door for oligarchy. Hence, it is liable to be knocked down being repugnant to Article 7(2) of the Constitution.

198. In this connection, the argument being placed by the learned Attorney General is that insertion of Article 7A in the Constitution has brought a new dimension within our constitutional schemes which have been made for bringing fear psychosis in the mind of the citizens to control democracy, to destruct supremacy of the Constitution and denial of the fundamental rights of the people, with malicious intention to prolong fascism and dictatorship in the country in the name and under the so called "controlled democracy". This insertion has been made to weaken the sovereign power of the citizens resulting to destruction of the democratic fabric of the country and denial of the rule of law and independence of the judiciary.

199. The core of our Constitution, he submits, is the people of the country and all power belongs solely to them but Article 7A has inflicted such harm on the people that their hearts bleed, they cannot express their opinion without fear, they cannot get the taste of democracy, cannot reclaim their rights and they cannot make revolution against the oppressor, arbitrator or authoritarian government. In fact, this very insertion of Article 7A should be considered as offences which have destructed the sovereignty and supremacy of the people as well as the basic structures of the Constitution and as such, Article 7A may kindly be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

200. In support of the submissions so made by the petitioners of both the writ petitions including the learned Attorney General, Mr. Shishir Munir, the learned Advocate submits that Article 7A has not only destroyed the supremacy of the Constitution, but has also destroyed the basic structures of the Constitution as well as has ravaged the will of the people.

201. Referring to quotation of Thomas Jefferson, 3rd President of USA that "The will of the people is the only legitimate foundation of any government, and to protect its free expression should be our first object." he goes to argue that Article 7 of our Constitution declares that all powers in the Republic belong to the people and their exercise on behalf of the people shall be effected only under and by the authority of this Constitution. Further, the Constitution as the solemn expression of the will of the people, is the supreme law of the Republic, and if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution that other law shall, to the extent of inconsistency, be void.

202. In this connection, he submits that the principle of basic structure was adopted by our apex Court in Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case where more or less 8(eight) principles were regarded as basic structure, i.e. "Sovereignty" belongs to the people, democracy, republican government, unitary State, separation of powers, independence of the judiciary, fundamental rights and supremacy of the Constitution.", which are unamendable. Thus, it is clear that if any other law including amendment law comes in contradiction with these principles, that law shall be void to the extent of inconsistency.

203. The Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011, he goes to argue, by inserting Article 7A after Article 7 has created inconsistency in the provisions of the Constitution, for, those contravene the basic structure of the Constitution. In this regard he contends that the wordings used in Article 7A is blatantly vague. Phrases like "by any other un-constitutional means" needs serious explanation since there is no proper list of what are those "other unconstitutional means"; what kind of action by the people will be treated as the unconstitutional means, has not been defined. If people of the nation do not resonate with any provision of the Constitution don't they have the right to question that provision? People do not get power through the Constitution. Constitution itself derives its power from the will of the people. Thus, if people want to abrogate, repeal or suspend any provision of the Constitution, they shall have all the right to do so because will of the people are the source of power and Constitution is the solemn expression of that will.

204. Article 7A, he submits, not only subverts the will of the people but also circumscribes such will. Moreover, it violates the freedom of thought, conscience and of speech which is guaranteed as fundamental right under Article 39 of the Constitution. As such, it liable to be declared void and ultra vires the Constitution.

205. Ms. Ishrat Hasan, in this regard submits that this new Article has created two substantive offences to be termed as constitutional sedition, i.e. abrogation, repeal or suspension of the Constitution by show or use of force or any other unconstitutional means [7A(1)(a)]; and subverting the confidence, belief or reliance of the citizens to the Constitution or any Article of it by show or use of force or by any other unconstitutional means [(7A(1)(b)]. Relying on this sub-article, she submits, the government of the day may file a case against a columnist or writer or news presenter or talk show presenter on the ground that the alleged writing, column, news or presentation or speech was written or presented in such a manner that it subverts the confidence, belief or reliance of the citizens to the Constitution. Thus, it gives sweeping power to the executive to harass the citizens at the cost of their guaranteed freedom of speech and expression. She further goes to argue, the words 'show of force', 'use of force' and 'unconstitutional means' are not only wide terms but are highly contestable. These provide scope for arbitrary exercise of power of the government to persecute legitimate public discussion, debate or, even academic argument against the desirability of a constitutional change under the purview of the 'unconstitutional means', should that be interpreted in that way.

206. Also, she argues, from the way the offence has been designed in clause(2)(b) it is clear that even judicial condonation has been made an offence of sedition and the Supreme Court's power of judicial review and condonation for the sake of restoration of democracy has been blocked. The category and status of the crime created in Article 7A also seems to clash with the existing provisions of the Penal Code, 1860, which is the substantive criminal law of the country.

207. She further submits that Article 7A creates a separate offence named sedition, better to be termed as "constitutional sedition" but again, sub-article 7A(3) states that persons alleged to have committed the offence shall be sentenced with the highest punishment prescribed for offences by the existing law. Plainly speaking, she submits, the offence and its actus reus have been created by the Constitution whereas the punishment is to be hired from the Penal Code. This inconsistent outlook of penal jurisprudence in a sacred document like the Constitution seems irrational and conflicting with the spirit of the constitutional jurisprudence. Hence, it is liable to be declared ultra-vires the Constitution.

208. It is the established principle of law that where no reasonable standards are laid down to define guilt in a section which creates an offence, and where no clear guidance is given to either law abiding citizens as to what exactly is the offence which has been committed or to authorities who are administering the section and courts who will try the offence, must be struck down as being vague, open ended, undefined, arbitrary and unreasonable.

209. In City of Chicago v. Morales et al MANU/USSC/0045/1999: 527 U.S. 41 (1999), a Chicago Gang Congregation Ordinance prohibited criminal street gang members from loitering with one another or with other persons in any public place for no apparent purpose. The Court gave reference to an earlier judgment in United States v. Reese MANU/USSC /0108/1875: 92 U.S. 214 (1875) at 221 where it was observed that the Constitution does not permit a legislature to set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders and leave it to the Court to step in and say who could be rightfully detained and who should be set at liberty. In the light of the said observations it was held that "the broad sweep of the Ordinance violated the requirement that a legislature needs to meet: to establish minimum guidelines to govern law enforcement. As the impugned Ordinance did not have any such guidelines, a substantial amount of innocent conduct would also be brought within its net, leading to its unconstitutionality."

210. It was further held that "a penal law is void for vagueness if it fails to define the criminal offence with sufficient definiteness. Ordinary people should be able to understand what conduct is prohibited and what is permitted. Also, those who administer the law must know what offence has been committed so that arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement of the law does not take place."

211. Article 7 of the Constitution is the embodiment of the will of the people, the "will" which shapes the fundamental rights of every citizen of the county and guarantees these rights under the Constitution. As has been observed by the Appellate Division in the 8th Amendment Case, fundamental rights are basic structure of the Constitution [1989 BLD (Special Issue) 1, para-377, p-156,], which cannot be curtailed by the Parliament with limitation on legislative capacity in the name of having amending power under Article 142 of the Constitution, based on vague, undefined use of expressions leading to creating an offence of sedition with scope of imposition of the highest punishment, i.e. death penalty. Thus, it goes to violate his right to life and personal liberty [Article-32].

212. As such, there is no doubt to find that the undefined and vague expressions used in Article 7A are in direct conflict of a citizen's fundamental right guaranteed under Article 39, i.e. to have a different view, to have freedom of thought and conscience and of speech and expression. Moreover, due to the said vague and undefined restrictions on the right to freedom of thought and conscience and of speech and expression a citizen of the country shall be subjected to criminal proceeding with charge of sedition and its highest punishment is death penalty (Section 124A of the Penal Code), as has been observed earlier.

213. In other words, Article 7A is a mechanism introduced with constitutional device to establish authoritarianism and as such, is in direct conflict with the core concept of the Constitution, i.e. the will of the people, as enshrined in Article 7.

214. Thus, we find that since Article 7A is repugnant to and is inconsistent to Articles 7, 32, 39 and 142 of the Constitution, which alters the basic structure of the Constitution; hence, it cannot be allowed to remain as part of the Constitution. Accordingly, Article 7A is hereby declared void being ultra vires the Constitution.

215. Article 7B binds the successor Parliament from bringing any change in the Constitution by making respective provisions of the Constitution unamendable. In the above manner, Article 7B has also been inserted by the Parliament after Article 7A with the amendment of Article 7, which runs as under:

"     :
       ,  ,    ,    , -                      , , ,        

"7B. Basic provisions of the Constitution are not amendable:
Notwithstanding anything contained in article 142 of the Constitution, the preamble, all articles of Part I, all articles of Part II, subject to the provisions of Part IXA all articles of Part III, and the provisions of articles relating to the basic structures of the Constitution including article 150 of Part XI shall not be amendable by way of insertion, modification, substitution, repeal or by any other means.]"

216. Vide Article 7B, 55 specific articles, various other articles relating to basic structure including 5th to 7th Schedule of the Constitution are made unamendable. Besides, Article 7B overrides Article 142 stating, inter alia, "notwithstanding anything contained in Article 142". Conversely, Article 142 provides, "notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution". In other words, Article 142 overrides the entire Constitution including Article 7B; thus, makes the overriding clause of Article 7B ineffective over Article142.

217. In this regard, we find it apt to quote the observations made by the Appellate Division on overriding clause of Article 142, i.e. "notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution"- "True it is wide but when it is claimed 'unlimited' power what does it signify? to abrogate? or by amending it can the republican character be destroyed to bring monarchy instead? The Constitutional power is not limitless-it connotes a power which is a constituent power. The higher the obligation the greater the responsibility-that is why the special procedure (long title) and special majority is required. Article 7(2) says-"if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution that other law shall to the extent of the inconsistency be void".

218. However, while elaborating the meaning of "amendment" the Appellate Division goes to say, "Thus an amendment corrects errors of commission or omission, modifies the system without fundamentally changing its nature-that is an amendment operatives within the theoretical parameters of the existing Constitution. But a proposal that would attempt to transform a central aspect of the nature of the compact and create some other kind of system- that to take an extreme example, tried to change a Constitutional democracy into a totalitarian state-would not be an amendment at all, but a re-creation, a reforming, not merely of the covenant but also of the people themselves. That deed would lie beyond the scope of the authority of any governmental body or set of bodies, for they are all creatures of the Constitution and the people's agreement. Insofar as they destroy their own legitimacy." 41 DLR (AD) 165, p-222, para-221.

219. In this connection, Mr. Fida M. Kamal, the learned Senior Counsel submits that Article 7B marks a significant departure from the basic structure doctrine as expounded in Anwar Hossain Chowdhury Case, which has, in fact, severely affected the application of at least two provisions: Articles 142 and 7 of the Constitution. For example, Article 7B has taken away much of the Parliament's power to amend the Constitution. The relationship between Article 7 and Article 7B is more complex. Article 7 declares the Constitution to be the supreme law to the effect that any law (including a constitutional amendment), if inconsistent with the Constitution, shall be void. Thus, Article 7, in one hand, contemplates that the Constitution in its entirety is the supreme law and all of its provisions have a prima facie co-equal status. On the other hand, Article 7B, by making unamendable at least more than one-third of the provisions of the Constitution, gives rise to an impression that certain constitutional provisions are superior to others. While Article 7 envisages a horizontally configured Constitution, Article 7B introduces hierarchy among the constitutional provisions. The net result is that Article 7B has created severe barriers to constitutional progress. It has modified the application of Article 26(3) in a noticeable manner. In this connection, he also goes to argue that Article 26(3) accepts constitutional amendments from judicial review, even if they are inconsistent with Part III of the Constitution. As Part I, II and III can no longer be amended because of Article 7B, the application of Article 26(3), so far as it relates to these Parts, has been reduced to redundancy. Moreso, since Article 26(3) itself is included in Part III, the same cannot be deleted or modified by way of amendment. Adding to the complexity, Article 7B itself cannot be amended as it falls under Part I of the Constitution. Ironically, being a constitutional amendment, Article 7B shuts the door to subsequent amendments despite the fact that it does not make any ostensible claim of superiority over other constitutional amendments in any respect. More importantly, Article 7B has brought in significant changes in the method of scrutiny to determine the validity of future amendments to the Constitution.

220. He again submits that the basic structure doctrine has laid down a substantive compatibility test for determining the validity of constitutional amendments. Now, in view of Article 7B, any amendments to Parts I, II and III, Article 150, as well as the respective provisions relating to the basic structures of the Constitution will simply be void for the reason that the Parliament will exceed its power if it passes such amendments. Considering the above principles of law, he contends, Article 7B is contradictory with the judgement passed in the Eighth Amendment Case and therefore, Section 7 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 is liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

221. In support of the above contentions of the learned counsels of the respective writ petitions and the learned Attorney General appearing for the respondents-government, Mr. Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar, the learned Senior Counsel goes to argue that basic structure of the Constitution was never expressly mentioned in the Constitution; however, by insertion of Article 7B basic structures of the Constitution have been recognized which include the Preamble, articles of Part I, all articles of Part II with exception of Part IXA, all articles of Part III and other articles relating to the basic structures of the Constitution, which demonstrate that despite the above articles there are certain provisions in the Constitution which may be determined as basic structures. However, he submits, Article 7B says that these provisions "shall not be amendable by way of insertion, modification, substitution, repeal or by any other means". This, in other words, means the future generation of Bangladesh cannot change any other things listed in Article 7B of the Constitution because those who put it today have decided for all generations and all time to come for Bangladesh. Does this not mean that "we, the people" or "will of the people" as enunciated in Article 7 are not sovereign anymore?

222. In this regard, learned Senior Counsel contends that the people of Bangladesh have obtained independence through a 'war of independence' by a revolution. The necessity of the occasion invented the remedy. Unlike what the Fifteenth Amendment has done to us, he submits, when our Constitution was framed, or even when provision for referendum for changing certain provisions of the Constitution was incorporated by the Fifth Amendment, it was intended that our Constitution would be a progressive document or be a work in progress. He also submits that the power to amend the Constitution is the "safety-valve" to a nation and is as necessary to the safety of the State as it is to a boiler. The check on it is the ultimate right to a revolution if it becomes intolerable, oppressive and the oppression cannot be thrown off otherwise. Accordingly, he concludes his submission quoting the statements of Vattel so made in his Law of Nations:

"There can be no difficulty in the case if the whole nation be unanimously inclined to make a change. But it is asked, what is to be done if the people are divided? In the ordinary management of the State, the opinion of the majority must pass without dispute for that of the whole nation; otherwise, it would be almost impossible for the society to take any resolution. The amending power of the Constitution, is a recognition for the posterity to have the same power and prudence to do the right thing without being bound by any "blind veneration for antiquity, for custom, or for names".

223. Mr. Mohammad Shishir Manir in this regard contends that Article 7B of the Constitution does ultimate injustice to the core principles of the Constitution. In the name of making the basic structure unamendable it has bound the will of the people within a boundary. In a democratic country like ours, he submits, will of the people are formulated into law by the elected members of the Parliament and Parliament decides what manifests the will of the people. One thing that may be reasonable during the term of a Parliament, may not be the same for the future Parliament. Man cannot predict the future. Thus, with the passage of time things lose their relevancy and new concept /new principle takes their place. This argument is valid in the case of the will of the people as well.

224. Accordingly, he submits that it is the general rule that no Parliament can bind the successor Parliament and therefore, Article 7B is a clear violation of this rule as it makes most of the provisions of the Constitution unamendable for eternity. By binding the future Parliament the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has destroyed democracy and negated the will of the people, which are the basic structures of the Constitution. Above all, to establish an authoritarian regime in the country where will of the people will be subservient to the will of a political party; hence, it is liable to be knocked down being ultra vires the Constitution.

225. Ms. Ishrat in this connection goes to argue that Article 7B of the Constitution has blocked the amending power of the successor Parliament and at the same time, it has nullified the power of judicial review of the Supreme Court. There are more than 50 articles (in fact, 53 articles) in this group and amending power over any of these articles has been curtailed. The implication of this amendment will be far reaching both from the view of treating the Constitution as a living document and also, the power of judicial review.

226. She elaborates her argument by submitting that this Article has not only affected but also, undermined the power of judicial review of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh when it says that basic structure provisions cannot be amended by any means. What is "basic structure" is to be determined by the court and not by any one else; it is unthinkable that the Parliament by amendment can block this judicial power of the Supreme Court. She also submits that when Article 7B specifies that the provisions of article relating to the basic structures of the Constitution are not amendable, it seems to have stretched to an indefinite number of provisions of the Constitution leading to vagueness and uncertainties. As such, it is unconstitutional.

227. Article 142, no doubt, is the amending power of the Parliament, which gives effect to the sovereign power of the people, as enshrined in Article 7. The Parliament as being the representative of the people is empowered to amend the Constitution by way of insertion, modification, substitution or repeal in the manner as prescribed therein subject to Articles 7 and 26 of the Constitution. Said power is to be adapted to various crisis of human affairs, as observed by Marshal, C.J. John Stuart Mill that, "no Constitution can expect to be permanent unless it guarantees progress as well as order".

228. Also, "every Constitution is expected to endure for a long time. Therefore, it must necessarily be elastic. It is not possible to place the society in a straight jacket. The society grows, its requirements change. The Constitution and the laws may have to be changed to suit those needs. No single generation can bind the course of the generation to case. Hence, every Constitution wisely drawn up provides for its own amendment.": Kesavananda Bharati Sripadalvara Vs. State of Kerala (supra).

229. In Ellen Street Estates, Ltd. v. Minister of Health [1934] 1 K.B. 590 Maugham L.J. observed, "The legislature cannot, according to our constitution, bind itself as to the form of subsequent legislation, and it is impossible for Parliament to enact that in a subsequent statute dealing with the same subject-matter there can be no implied repeal. If in a subsequent Act Parliament chooses to make it plain that the earlier statute is being to some extent repealed, effect must be given to that intention just because it is the will of the legislature.

230. In the light of the above spirit of the time, unamendability clause of Article 7B cannot be imposed upon the successor Parliament. Moreover, Article 7B not being an original provision of the Constitution cannot be termed as a basic structure of the Constitution.

231. In addition to the above, it is difficult to harmoniously interprete Article 7B with Article 142, for, the use of the phrase "notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution" in Article 142 has given power of amendment over all the provisions of the Constitution including Article 7B. Conversely, by using the phrase ""Notwithstanding anything contained in article 142 of the Constitution" in Article 7B, a contradictory situation has cropped up giving rise to confusion over the authority of Article 142. It is well settled principle of interpretation that all parts of the Constitution should be read together and harmoniously ensuring that its provisions are understood in the context of its spirit, its principles, and its broader purpose. Use of two non-obstante clauses, one in Article 7B and the other in Article 142, is preventing harmonious reading thereof, but considering the paramountcy of Article 142 it is given predominance over Article 7B of the Constitution.

232. Considering the above, Article 7B is hereby declared void as being ultra vires the Constitution for having been incorporated in derogation of Articles 7 and 142 of the Constitution.

233. As a result, Section 7 of the Act No.14 of 2011 vide which Articles 7A and 7B have been incorporated by the Parliament after Article 7 is hereby declared void and non-est.

Article 44(2): Diversifying the power of the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh

234. In our Constitution, limited government with three organs performing designated functions has been envisaged and judiciary is one of those organs. In the scheme of Article 7 and therefore, of the Constitution the structural pillars of Parliament and judiciary are basic and fundamental:41 DLR (AD) 165, p-231, para 293.

235. Supreme Court of Bangladesh, however, is vested with the plenary judicial power for maintenance of the supremacy of the Constitution: 41 DLR (AD) 165 para-58, p-198. In view of the scheme and objectives of the Constitution our Appellate Division in the 8th Amendment case has included, among others, supremacy of the Constitution, separation of powers, independence of judiciary and fundamental rights as the basic features of our Constitution, including rule of law. However, the validity of the impugned amendment may be examined with or without resorting to the doctrine of basic feature, on the touchstone of the Preamble itself. [1989 BLD (Spl) 1, pp-156, 171, para 377 and 443].

236. Fact remains, supremacy of the Constitution and rule of law cannot be achieved without the guardianship of the Supreme Court and per force judicial review must be taken to be a basic structure of the Constitution: Constitutional Law of Bangladesh, Mahmudul Islam, 3rd Ed. para 4.67, P-539.

237. High Court Division, no doubt, is an integral part of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, for, Article 94 provides-

"There shall be a Supreme Court for Bangladesh (to be known as the Supreme Court of Bangladesh) comprising the Appellate Division and the High Court Division".

238. However, Article 44, as it stood originally in 1972 runs as under:

"The right to move the Supreme Court in accordance with clause (1) of Article 102 for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) Without prejudice to the powers of the Supreme Court under Article 102, Parliament may by law empower any other court, within the local limits of its jurisdiction, to exercise all or any of these powers."

239. By the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1975 (Act II of 1975) it was substituted by a new article, which reads as follow:
"Parliament may by law establish a constitutional court, tribunal or commission for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part."

240. Subsequently, by Proclamation Order No. IV of 1976 it was substituted with the following:-

"(1) The right to move the High Court in accordance with clause (2) of Article 102 for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed;
(2) Without prejudice to the powers of the High Court under Article 102, Parliament may by law empower any other Court within the local limits of its jurisdiction, to exercise all or any of those powers."

241. Later, by the Second Proclamation Order No. 1 of 1977 the words "High Court Division" was substituted with the words "High Court", which is quoted herein below:-

"44.(1) The right to move the [High Court Division] in accordance with [clause (1) of Article 102, for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed;
(2) Without prejudice to the powers of the [High Court Division] under Article 102, Parliament may by law empower any other court, within the local limits of its jurisdiction, to exercise all or any of those powers]"

242. Article 44 of the Constitution, as it stands now vide the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 is quoted below:
"   
()            ()             
()                                  

"44. Enforcement of fundamental rights
(1) The right to move the High Court Division in accordance with clause (1) of Article 102, for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) Without prejudice to the powers of the High Court Division under article 102, Parliament may by law empower any other court, within the local limits of its jurisdiction to exercise all or any of those powers."

243. However, in order to appreciate Article 44, Article 102(1) also needs to be looked into, which runs thus:
"          
[ ()                                       "

"102. Powers of High Court Division to issue certain orders and directions, etc.
(1) The High Court Division on the application of any person aggrieved, may give such directions or orders to any person or authority, including any person performing any function in connection with the affairs of the Republic, as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of this Constitution."

244. Vide Article 102(1) the High Court Division has the plenary power to enforce fundamental rights as conferred by Part III of the Constitution. According to Article 44(2) the Parliament has been empowered to make law in order to confer said plenary power of the High Court Division including the power to enforce fundamental rights as conferred under Part III to any other court within the local limits of its jurisdiction.

245. In this regard, it is pertinent to observe that the right to move the High Court Division in accordance with Article 102(1) for the enforcement of rights conferred under Part III, is a fundamental right under Article 44(1). If pursuant to Article 44(2) any other court other than High Court Division is conferred with the power of the High Court Division, will go to contradict with Article 44(1) and thereby shall go to affect the fundamental right of the citizen since the Constitution has guaranteed the said right under Article 44(1). Moreover, vide the impugned Article 44(2), the power being exercised by the High Court Division can now be conferred to any other court of law.

246. In this regard, the learned Attorney General goes to contend that Article 44(2) is inconsistent with the basic structure of the Constitution inasmuch as it is opposed to the ratio settled in the judgment of the 8th Amendment Case being that the High Court Division cannot be broken into pieces and its jurisdiction cannot be made subject to the wish of the executives or the legislature. As per this impugned provision, if the Parliament desires, it may delegate the jurisdiction of the High Court Division upon any subordinate court which is a complete destruction of the unitary form of the Bangladesh Supreme Court and thus, it hits the basic structure of the Constitution. Accordingly, he submits that the amended Article 44(2) is liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

247. The judicial structure of Bangladesh is two tiered comprising the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and the subordinate courts. Supreme Court acts as the guardian of the Constitution and the subordinate judiciary administers justice at the grassroots basing on the statute, promulgated by the Parliament. In addition, vide Article 109 the High Court Division shall have superintendence and control over all courts and tribunals subordinate to it.

248. In the given context, without mentioning the level of the court empowering any other court, which is the creature of the statute, to exercise plenary power of the High Court Division undermines the sanctity of the High Court Division, which is the creature of the Constitution, and is the guardian and protector of the Constitution of Bangladesh. Thus, Article 44(2) goes against the spirit of the 8th Amendment case, which established the oneness of the High Court Division upon declaring Article 100 of the Constitution ultra-vires on the findings that said Article "destroyed the essential limb of the judiciary namely, of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh by setting up rival courts to the High Court Division in the name of permanent Benches conferring full jurisdiction, powers and functions of the High Court Division".

249. Accordingly, we have no doubt to find that within the framework of the Constitution no other court can be placed at par with the High Court Division simultaneously conferring all or any of the powers of the High Court Division. Thus, Article 44(2) having hit the basic structure of the Constitution hence, is beyond the amending power of the Parliament under Article 142 of the Constitution.

250. Resultantly, Section 18 of the Act No. 14 of 2011 vide which Article 44 has been amended with the incorporation of Article 44 (2) is hereby declared void as being ultra vires the Constitution.

Article 116:
"    
 -          (- ,    )                "

251. So far Article 116 of the Constitution is concerned, as it now stands after Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011, is a sub judice matter in connection with Writ Petition No.10356 of 2024; hence, we refrain from making any observation to that effect.

252. In addition to the above provisions, the impugned amendment so made in the Preamble as well as some other articles of the Constitution vide Act No.14 of 2011 have also been assailed by the petitioners of the respective writ petitions and that the respondent government stand in support of the said assertions, namely, Preamble, Articles 4A, 6, 8-25, 26-47A, 95-116, 117A, 123(3), 150(2), 5th, 6th and 7th Schedule etc.

253. In this regard the arguments so have been placed by the petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024, the learned Attorney General for the respondent government and the respective Interveners are placed below:
The petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024.

254. Sections 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the Act No.14 of 2011:
Vide Section 3 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 the words, "absolute trust and faith in the Almighty Allah" as were incorporated in the Preamble, have been erased.

255. In this connection, Mr. A.S.M. Shahriar Kabir, the learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024 goes to argue that India and Pakistan were created on the basis of two-nation theory, and after the partition of Pakistan, the Objectives Resolution of 1949 was the first constitutional document that proved to be the foundation of the constitutional developments in Pakistan which stated that, "Sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and that the authority which He has delegated to the State of Pakistan through its people for being exercised within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust". In Asma Jilani V. The Government of the Panjab and another: PLD 1972(SC) 139, it was held that sovereignty is vested in the Almighty alone and the authority which He had delegated to the State through its people, for being exercised within the limits prescribed by Him, is a sacred trust, therefore, Islam should be regarded as a basic structure of our Constitution. Furthermore, in the Sixteenth Amendment Case, para-31, it was affirmed that Islam is one of the basic structures of the Constitution. As such, omitting the principle of absolute trust and faith in the Almighty Allah is a fundamental departure from the belief of 91% of the people of this country and therefore, Sections 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the Act No.14 of 2011 are liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

256. Section 5 of the Act, 2011:
He further submits that the Proclamation of Independence, 10th April, 1971 identified Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as "Bangabandhu", who returned to Bangladesh on 10.01.1972. However, on 11.01.1972, as the President of Bangladesh he passed the Provisional Constitution of Bangladesh Order, 1972. In the late afternoon on 12.01.1972, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman left the office of the President, administered the oath of the office of Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury and then Justice Abu Sayeed Chowdhury appointed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as the Prime Minister of Bangladesh and administered his oath on 12.01.1972.

257. The above fact shows that Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had never been called as the Father of the Nation, nor the Founder of the Nation. Therefore, calling Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as the Father of the Nation substituting Article 4A of the Constitution vide Section 5 of the Act, 2011 is a fraud being practiced upon the people and hence, is ultra vires the Constitution.

258. Sections 8-15 of the Act, 2011:
He also submits that Articles 8-25 were treated as fundamental principles of state policy and that under the doctrine of basic structure of the Constitution the fundamental principles cannot be amended. However, vide Sections 8-15 of the Act, 2011 the Parliament without referendum not only changed the fundamental principles of state policy with the incorporation of "secularism" but also, changed the definition of "nationalism", including addition of so many new Articles which were not included in the original Constitution of 1972 and therefore, Sections 8-15 are liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

259. Sections 16-19 of the Act, 2011:
He also submits that Articles 26-47A are protected under Part III of the Constitution and are also, treated as the basic structure of the Constitution. However, vide Article 7 read with Article 26, those provisions are unamendable without referendum. Sections 16-19 of the Act, 2011 have completely ignored the foundation of the Constitution by amending the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution. As such, Sections 16-19 are liable to be declared ultra vires, repugnant and void-ab-initio.

260. Again, he submits that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment), Act, 2011 is indeed a disaster for the constitutional mechanism of Bangladesh, as well as the rule of law undermining the will of the people including the sacrifice of a million of lives for restoration of democracy. The glorious July 36th Revolution of 2024 reminds us that, "these dead shall not have died in vain, that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, that the Government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth." In the name of absolute majority, no political party can undermine the will of the people by amending the Constitution, even by referendum. After the impugned amendment, in fact, the present Constitution became a footnote-based Constitution, there is no such other example of its kind in the world.

261. By incorporating the Fifteenth Amendment, he goes to argue, the Legislature has made about one-third of the Constitution a "holy text" that can never be changed or amended. The Parliament promulgated Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 even before the nation could see what the judges had to say about Thirteenth Amendment in a divided verdict that contained diverse opinion about the system of Non-Party Caretaker Government and as such, the said amendment is ultra vires the Constitution.

262. Sections 30-39 of the Act, 2011:
His further contentions are that it is the settled principle of law, as established in the Eighth and Sixteenth Amendment cases that judiciary is also a part of the basic structure of the Constitution and the Parliament cannot amend Part VI of the Constitution, but Sections 30 to 39 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 have drastically amended the provisions of Part VI of the Constitution, which is protected under the basic structure doctrine and therefore, Sections 30-39 of the Act, 2011 is liable to declared ultra vires, repugnant and void-ab-initio.

263. Lastly, he submits that the members of the Parliament were nominated on the basis of the manifesto given before the election and they were elected by the people on the basis of that manifesto. The members of the Parliament did not have any legitimate authority to pass any Act which is conflicting with their political manifesto. The Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011, no doubt, is unconstitutional and is against the basic structures of the Constitution; hence, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 16, 20, 21, 25, 39, 42, 44, 47, 50, 53 and 55 of the impugned Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 are liable to be declared ultra vires and repugnant to the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.

264. The respondent-government.-
Above the Preamble:
So far the incorporation of "-  (,  ,  )/    " above the Preamble of the Constitution vide Act No.14 of 2011 is concerned the learned Attorney General submits that vide Section 2 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act the meaning of 'Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim' "   ", has been amended by adding a new meaning which is based on completely a wrong understanding inasmuch as there is no alternative meaning of 'Allah' and 'Allah' is now a Bengali word inserted in Bangla Academy Dictionary, p-128, wherein the meaning of Allah, '' is not mentioned. As such, he contends a new meaning has been introduced arbitrarily and unjustly; the only meaning of 'Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim' should be ",  ,  ". By this amendment, inserting a wrong meaning of 'Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim', the Parliament has created an ambiguity, hit the belief of the citizens and undermined the dignity of the Constitution and therefore, this part of the impugned Fifteenth Amendment Act may kindly be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

265. Preamble:
By Section 3 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, the words "    " has been substituted replacing the words "    " in the 1st paragraph of the Preamble, and the following substitution has been made in the 2nd paragraph of the Preamble "   ,                  -, ,          

266. In this context, the learned Attorney General goes to argue that democracy is a part of the basic structure of our Constitution, not socialism; in the Fifth Amendment Act, 1979 the word 'socialism' was explained as "Socialism means economic and social justice", which has been widely acclaimed and accepted by all concerns and became a part of the democratic exercise of the State. For this reason, the former second paragraph of the Preamble which was substituted by the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 under Section 3 is a colorable legislation affecting the people's will, which should not be retained and hence, this part of the Fifteenth Amendment Act may kindly be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

267. Article 4A:
By Section 5 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, Article 4A has been substituted in place of previous Article 4A, which runs as follows-
"           , ,          - ,   ,       ,    ,            "

268. In this regard, he goes to submit that by inserting Article 4A, a respectful politician of this country being Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, whose paramount political contribution prior to our first liberation war in 1971 has been made a subject matter of serious debate of the country. By this insertion, unnecessary debate, criticism and controversy about him has been raised for which he is considered to be the 'father of the nation' by his followers only, not by the nation as a whole or in that view of the matter, not by the majority of the people. Moreso, he contends, it is neither originated from the original Constitution nor it is a basic structure, nor it is an undisputed subject for the nation. In spite of his political role in the history, his administrative role were never free from debate. In the said pretext, identifying his designation as 'father of the nation' in the Constitution by the impugned Fifteenth Amendment Act thus, suffered from malice in law and facts as well as a glaring instance of colorable legislation, which is not the reflection of the will of the people, rather an endeavor to destruct the constitutional scheme; hence, is liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

269. Article 6:
Article 6 of the Constitution has been substituted by Section 6 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, which runs as under:
" ()        
()           "

270. Referring to the above, he submits that if the citizens of Bangladesh are known as "Bengali", then what will happen to the Chakmas, Marmas and other casts, sects? Under this principle, can the people of Poshchim Bangla, Bihar, Urishya, where there are people who speaks Bangla, be called the citizens of Bangladesh? This notion of a unified identity focusing solely on 'Bengali' language is creating divisions among the diverse people of Bangladesh. Thus, the power of the sovereign unity is being axed and the spirit of 'We ness' of our Constitution is being hit. Everyone cannot be forced to become Bengali regardless of caste, religion, or ethnicity; this is not the spirit of our liberation war and other democratic norms but by way of colorable exercise of power.

271. Further, he submits that under the defined constitutional territory, people from all walks of life are included, not solely Bengali speaking people. No nation or citizens can be defined only on the basis of language; for example, in India, Pakistan, Sri-Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives where people of various cultures and languages co-exist but none of their national identity is defined by its languages but by territorial boundaries. In the United States, he submits, the citizens are being identified as 'Americans' and nowhere in the world, the nation are being identified by language. Unfortunately, with this impugned amendment the basic structure of the Constitution as well as the supremacy of the Constitution have hit the concept of equality before law where all the citizens of the country are equal. As such, he submits, upon restoring the Fifth Amendment Act, 1979 the provision as amended in the impugned Fifteenth Amendment Act is liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

272. Article 117A:
"  -()                         ,   ,  ,          (    ) 
()  ()      ,                   
()   , , , , ,             
() ()      -           
()            ,   -
()  ,      ,  , - ,              -        ;
()        -     ,       -     ;
()                         
()                "

273. Referring to the above provision of law, the learned Attorney General goes to argue that Section 34 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, 2011 Part VIA (Article 117A), containing provision of National Party being one party system has been restored inasmuch of Part VIA (Article 117A) was introduced in the Constitution Fourth Amendment which was later repealed/omitted by the Fifth Amendment in 1979. Since the provision of the Fifth Amendment has been omitted by this Fifteenth Amendment Act, it is presumed that they have restored the Fourth Amendment so far it relates to one party system. The purpose behind its declaration of omitting Article 117A by the impugned amendment may not be to preserve democracy but to restore a one-party rule system. This amendment, which reintroduced this one party provision, was unnecessary and maliciously brought. It affects democracy, which is a basic structure of the Constitution and as such, this amendment be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

274. Article 123(3):
By Section 37 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, clause (3) of Article 123 has been substituted in place of previous clause (3) of Article 123 in the following terms:
" - 
() -    -
() -           ; 
() -              
   ,   () -      ,  -     ,       "

"123. Time for holding elections
(3) A general election of the members of Parliament shall be held-
(a) in the case of a dissolution by reason of the expiration of its term, within the period of ninety days preceding such dissolution; and
(b) in the case of a dissolution otherwise than by reason of such expiration, within ninety days after such dissolution :
Provided that the persons elected at a general election under sub-clause (a) shall not assume office as members of Parliament except after the expiration of the term referred to therein."

275. In this connection, he submits that after being elected, constitutionally Members of Parliament continue for 5 (five) years starting from the date of taking oath. Vide the said amendment a Member of Parliament is contesting in the election while holding/retaining his existing position as a Member of Parliament and if he is re-elected, his tenure will commence after his existing tenure expires. This is a classic example of colorable legislation and a blatant attempt to destroy democratic harmony and its core norms being free, fair and impartial election. By this amendment, in one hand it can be an attempt to have taken control of or influence the election, on the other hand, there will be 350 existing members and 300 elected-gazetted members of parliament. Our Constitution does not endorse such numbers. Hence, on this count as well, Article 123(3) may kindly be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

276. Articles 150(2):
Vide Section 45 of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 Article 150 has been substituted in place of previous Article 150 in the followings terms:
"    -  ()                            
()                                           ,                                             ,           "

277. 5th, 6th & 7th Schedules:
By Section 50 of the Fifteenth Amendment Act, the 5th, 6th and 7th Schedules respectively have been inserted wherein the speech of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman of 7th March, 1971, Declaration of Independence by him and the Proclamation of Independence and Mujibnagar Government have been included in the said schedules.

278. In this regard, the contention of the learned Attorney General is that this amendment cannot be a part of the Constitution, for, it contains nothing of law to be treated as part of the Constitution. Moreover, this insertion/amendment is opposed to the ratio settled in the case of Asaduzzaman Siddique (Sixteenth Amendment Case) read with the Preamble of our Constitution inasmuch as by this amendment, it has tried to establish and uphold the contribution of a particular person and particular community in the Liberation War of 1971.

279. It is the spirit of our Constitution that "we, the people of Bangladesh", as he submits, owns the Liberation War. These insertion in the Constitution by the impugned Amendment has offended the spirit of 'we ness' and has also offended the citizens who have contributed in the Liberation War and for this reason, in the Preamble, no individual has been mentioned but mentioned that "we, the people of Bangladesh' having proclaimed our independence....".

280. The abovementioned proposition has been spelt out more elaborately in the Sixteenth Amendment Case, reported in 71 DLR (AD) (2019) 52, which runs as follows-
"The first word of the first sentence of the preamble of our constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is "WE". The strength of a nation lies in this word and spirit of "WE". This 'weness' is the key to nation building. A community remains a community unless all those who belong to the community can assimilate themselves in this mysterious chemistry of 'weness', the moment they are elevated to this stage they become a 'nation'. And our Founding Fathers very rightfully understood, realized and recognized this quintessential element of nation building and this is why they wrote the first sentence of the constitution "We, the people of Bangladesh, having proclaimed our independence on the 26th day of March, 1971 and, through a historic struggle for national liberation, established the independent, sovereign People's Republic of Bangladesh."
"These words mean that people are the source of all supreme power; People are the true achiever of the sovereignty and hence the constitution. The members of the Constituent Assembly were all people's representatives. The preamble, therefore, indicates that the legal basis of our constitution is the people- the ultimate source of all power."
[Para-61 and 62]
"Thus, if we carefully look into the philosophy of our political existence we unfailingly see that the citizens of our country are woven by a common thread called 'we the people'. And the solemn expression of the will of the people is the supreme law of the Republic, i.e. the Constitution. The triumph in 1971 was obvious because the feeling of 'weness' was unbreakable. There were numerous conspiracies to break this unity but the enemy utterly failed to inject even the slightest shred of doubt among us. Now that we are living in a free, independent and sovereign country, however, we are indulging into arrogance and ignorance which threaten the very precious tie and thread of 'we'." [Para-65];

281. Accordingly, he goes to contend that by inserting Article 150(2) and the 5th, 6th and 7th Schedules in the Constitution, the Legislature has offended the spirit of 'we ness' of the Constitution and tried to establish 'I ness'.

282. Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP), the Intervener:
Article 6:
In agreement with the contentions of the learned Attorney General and other Interveners Mr. Sircar also submits that the Constitutions is the solemn expression of the will of the people of Bangladesh and it begins with the word "We, the People of Bangladesh" that connote that there would be one identity of all citizens of the country living within the territory of Bangladesh. The purported amendment of Article 6 to identify the citizens as "Bangladeshi' and 'Bengali' is in clear conflict of the spirit of the Constitution that was earned by the blood of millions in 1971.

283. Article 150(2), 5th 6th and 7th Schedules:
In this connection Mr. Mohammad Jamiruddin Sircar adds, the purpose of the amendment of the Constitution is to accommodate the situation prospectively, not to bringing the country back to zero square. By amending Article 150, the Constitution has been made to be a party political document of the then ruling party, not a Constitution of 'we, the people of Bangladesh'. This amendment is purposive and itself a negation to the basic structure doctrine of constitutionalism, rule of law, independence of judiciary, fundamental rights, equality before laws, which have been developed over the years as the basic structures of the Constitution.

284. In other words, Article 150(2) and the said 3 (three) schedules, he submits, were nothing but to inject 'I ness and also, an indirect induction of political culture into the people's mind which suffers from gross infirmity inasmuch as it is a colorable legislation. This scheme of Fifteenth Amendment Act, has been made in order to prolong fascism and to destroy or demolish the rule of law, democracy, human rights, fundamental rights, supremacy of the Constitution, separation and independence of judiciary and all the things prejudicial to the unity of the nation and supremacy of our Constitution and as such, the impugned Article 150(2) along with the 5th 6th 7th Schedules are liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution.

285. Bangladesh Jammaat-e-Islami, the Intervener:
Preamble, Articles 8, 9, 10 and 12:
Mr. Shishir Munir submits that by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011, more than one-third of the constitutional provisions have been amended including the provisions relating to aspiration of the people incorporated in the Constitution as the fundamental principles. In this regard, he goes to argue that in the Preamble and Article 8 of the original Constitution of 1972 high ideals of nationalism, socialism, democracy and secularism were introduced as the aspiration for our heroic people who sacrificed their lives in the national liberation war and those ideals were declared as the fundamental principles of the state policy. The elaborations of these principles were incorporated in Articles 9, 10, 11 and 12 consecutively. Thereafter, in 1978, by the Second Proclamation (Fifteenth Amendment) Order, 1978 fundamental principle of secularism was changed to "Absolute faith and trust in the Almighty Allah, and socialism was meant to be economic and social justice. Said proclamation was later ratified and confirmed by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979. In 2011, by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 fundamental principles have been amended and the ideals of secularism and socialism have been reincorporated in the Constitution.

286. While elaborating his arguments he goes to submit that it is evident from the history of emergence of Bangladesh that socialism and secularism were never the aspiration of the citizen of this nation. From the Lahore Proposal, 1940 till the emergence of two nations in 1947 including the independence of Bangladesh, the historical documents transpire that the struggle and demand of the people was for a real living democracy where social and economic justice, protection of minorities, independence of judiciary would be ensured. Religious values of the majorities, i.e. the muslims were well reflected and respected in the above mentioned documents. Moreover, various documents relating to independence war found in "   " showcases grave impact of islamic faith and culture as the motivating factor for the freedom fighters.

287. Accordingly, he submits that the amendment introduced by the Second Proclamation (Fifteenth Amendment) Order, 1978 regarding the aspiration of the people in the Preamble and Article 8 are the true aspirations of the people of this nation. As such, Sections 3, 4, 8, 10 and 11 corresponding to the Preamble along with Articles 8, 10 and 12 of the Constitution are liable to be declared ultra vires the Constitution and the provisions previous to Fifteenth Amendment may kindly be restored.

288. Articles 2A, 6(2) and 9:
Article 2A of the Constitution, he submits, declares that the state religion of the Republic is Islam, but the State shall ensure equal status and equal right in the practice of the Hindu, Buddhist, Christian and other religions. This article directly contradicts with the Preamble and Article 8 of the Constitution which declares secularism as the fundamental principle. The term "secularism" has further been elaborated in Article 12. It declares that the principle of secularism shall be realised by the elimination of (a) communalism in all its forms; (b) the granting by the State of political status in favour of any religion; (c) the abuse of religion for political purposes; (d) any discrimination against, or persecution of, persons practicing a particular religion. It's hard to understand how secularism, i.e. the belief that religion shall not play a role in the government can be harmoniously constructed with Islam as the state religion.

289. Moreover, Article 6(2) declares that the people of Bangladesh shall be known as Bangalees as a nation and the citizens of Bangladesh shall be known as Bangladeshies. This Article is contradictory in itself. It creates confusion about the identity of the people of the country. Moreover, Article 9 has described the unity and solidarity of the Bangalee nation, which, deriving its identity from its language and culture, attained sovereign and independent Bangladesh through a united and determined struggle in the war of independence. Now, if these Articles are read together, it is difficult to figure out our identity as a citizen. Moreover, what about the indigenous people of this nation who does not share the same language or culture with bengalees but are core part of the country. Many of them were active freedom fighter and some of them even attained martyrdom in the process of independence war. These articles have failed to acknowledge their contribution for the country and by declaring people of Bangladesh to be known as bengalees as a nation, Article 6(2) has tried to impose Bengalee nationalism on the non-bengali indigenous people.

290. Thus, he submits that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has failed to create coherence among several Articles of the Constitution and thus, made the Constitution more cryptic.

291. Article 38:
Substitution of Article 38 by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has violated democracy which is one of the basic structures of the Constitution, as he argued. If we look back at the constitutional journey of freedom of association incorporated in Article 38, he submits, we can find that in the original Constitution of 1972 Article 38 was in the following terms:
"Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of morality or public order: Provided that no person shall have the right to form, or be a member or otherwise take part in the activities of, any communal or other association or union which in the name, on the basis of any religion has for its object or pursues, a political purpose."

292. In 1978, by the Second Proclamation (Fifteenth Amendment) Order, 1978 proviso to Article 38 was abolished. Thus, after the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979 Article 38 took the following form:
"Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of morality or public order."

293. The Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 has substituted Article 38 as under:
"Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of morality or public order:
Provided that no person shall have the right to form, or be a member of the said association or union, if- (a) it is formed for the purposes of destroying the religious, social and communal harmony among the citizens; (b) it is formed for the purposes of creating discrimination among the citizens, on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or language; (c) it is formed for the purposes of organizing terrorist acts or militant activities against the State or the citizens or any other country; (d) its formation and objects are inconsistent with the Constitution."

294. Thus, it can be clearly seen that the impugned amendment has imposed unreasonable restriction on the freedom of association by adding those conditions which totally negated the basic concept of freedom of association. This provision puts an unreasonable bar on the formation of a political party on the basis of religion or other beliefs.

295. In this regard he goes to argue that all over the world whether it is east or west formation of a political party on the basis of religion is approved. If a nation wants to form a political party on the ideology of certain religion, he submits, they shall have the power to do so. Even, the people with atheist ideology or secular ideology shall have the freedom of association subject to reasonable restrictions. This provision can easily be used as weapon to declare any kind of association to be formed for the purposes of destroying the religious, social and communal harmony among the citizens. In a democratic country like ours this cannot be done. Only people can determine who will ultimately govern them. If a political party formed on the basis of religion or secularism gain with the trust and support of the majority people, they shall be able to form the government. By incorporating conditions to Article 38 spirit of freedom of association has been demolished.

296. He further submits that democracy is a basic structure of the Constitution and anything corollary to democracy is also a part of the democracy. In support, he has referred an article published by the European Court of Human Rights titled "Guide on Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights- Freedom of assembly and association" which has emphasized on the importance of the right to freedom of association in a democratic society. Thomas I. Emerson in his article titled "Freedom of Association and Freedom of Expression" published in Yale Law Journal Vol.74 (1964) states that "No one can doubt that freedom of association, as a basic mechanism of the democratic process, must receive constitutional protection...". The Constitutional Court of South Africa in New Nation Movement NPC and others vs President of the Republic of South Africa and others (2020) emphasized on "the necessity to a functioning democracy of such a freedom (freedom of association), for a proper and coherent expression and interplay of collective interests."

297. Accordingly, he submits that an association shall enjoy such freedoms which are being enjoyed by an individual. Hence, there shall be no unreasonable bar on the freedom of association as there can be no unreasonable bar to personal freedom. Article 38 as it was after 5th Amendment was perfect in every sense. By adding unreasonable conditions in Article 38, Fifteenth Amendment has, in fact, curtailed the actual freedom of association, which is a fundamental right of the people of the nation. As such, Section 16 corresponding to Article 38 (as amended) is liable to be declared ultra-vires the Constitution.

298. Article 4A, 150(2) including 5th, 6th and 7th Schedule:
In this regard, he goes to argue that the Parliament substituted Article 4A in the Constitution and made preserving and displaying portrait of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in all the government offices compulsory. In the same provision it established Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as the father of the nation. This provision is really an unnecessary provision to be the part of the Constitution. Moreover, there is no consensus among people of the country about Sheikh Mujibur Rahman being the father of the nation. But this Article imposes people to remember him as the father of the nation. Such unnecessary provision in the Constitution doesn't add any value to it. Furthermore, in this single provision his speech of 7th March and declaration of independence of 26th March has been added in the 5th and 6th Schedule of the Constitution.

299. In this connection, he goes to argue that all the documents that are included in the 5th, 6th and 7th Schedule are part of our political history, and it serves a specific group of political party to be the stakeholder of the independence war. As we all know, the people of our country didn't fight for 'Bengalee' nationalism or any ideology that any particular political party might try to impose on them. Our nationalism is defined by our territory, whoever lives in this territory whether Bengalee or non-Bengalee, indigenous, Muslim, Hindu, Christian, Buddhist are all part of us. Whether people of this territory possess same ideology or not is insignificant in this case.

300. He also submits that on going through the Constitution of twenty-seven countries who have gained their independence through bloody war to find out whether they had made their political historical document part of their Constitution, it transpired that not a single country has done anything similar to us. Furthermore, Mr. Mahmudul Islam in his Constitutional Law of Bangladesh book commented on the inclusion of Schedule 5, 6 and 7 in the Constitution as follows:
"the fifteenth amendment made something extraordinary when by adding clause (2) to art. 150, it made the speech of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman delivered on 7th march, 1971 his declaration of independence on 26th march, 1971 and the proclamation of independence in Mujibnagar on 19th April, 1971 part of the constitution by including them as fifth, sixth and seventh schedule to the text of the constitution. The speech of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 7th march, 1971 is a glittering piece of our political history, but it contains nothing of law to be treated as part of the constitution. The other two documents may be treated as constitutional documents in the sense that they may provide external aid for interpretation of the constitution and the laws in appropriate cases, nevertheless, they are not part of the constitution."

301. Ultimately, Fifteenth Amendment has made these Articles unamendable and declared these as the basic structures of the Constitution through insertion of Article 7B.

302. Lastly, he submits that the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 was passed to establish authoritarianism in the country. This amendment was made to serve the purpose of fascism. Insertion of Article 4A, 150(2), Schedule 5, 6 and 7 are a glaring example of authoritarianism which have altogether damaged the fabric of the Constitution. It destroyed the basic structure, subverted the will of the people, suppressed fundamental rights like freedom of association, freedom of thought and conscience, destroyed the process of free and fair election system, making the election committee puppet of the ruling government, destroyed democracy in the country and turned the country into an authoritarian regime. Therefore, for the greater interest of the people of the nation the amendment so made in Preamble, Articles 4A, 150(2) including Schedule 5, 6 and 7 respectively be declared void as being ultra vires the Constitution.

303. Secularism is needed to protect application of Articles 19, 23, 25, 27, 31 and 39 of the Constitution.-
Mr. ABM Hamidul Mishbah, a practicing Advocate of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, and the Founder of Bangladesh Intellectual Property Forum, having aptitude in the areas of intellectual property and technology has been impleaded as intervener in the instant writ petition. He, however, supports inclusion of the word "secularism" in the respective provisions of the Constitution in the interest of justice, inclusivity, diversity, ensuring freedom for creative and innovative work, freedom of expression of thoughts and conscience, preserving human rights, social justice, and technological development and proliferation within Bangladesh, as well as for the interest of Bangladesh to uphold secularism and continue to be a secular State in all aspects.

304. "Secularism", he contends, is one of the four fundamental principles of state policy as enshrined under Articles 8 and 12 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. In this regard he goes to submit that the principle "secularism" separates religion from state governance. It ensures that laws, policies and initiatives taken for the welfare of public remain impartial, inclusive, and grounded on the principles of equality, human rights, common values, and justice. It prevents religious beliefs from influencing government actions and guarantees equal treatment for all citizens, irrespective of faith. Secularism ensures no religion is privileged or discriminated against by the State, protects minorities from marginalization and allows individuals the freedom to practice, change, or reject religion without state interference. It reduces inter and intra-religious conflicts, ensures that public policies are based on universal principles rather than religious doctrines and promotes a fair, inclusive, harmonious and peaceful society. By separating religion from the country's governance system, he argues, secularism ensures neutrality which creates a strong sense of shared national belonging within citizens' minds regardless of their faith, and characterizes as a just and equitable society.

305. He fortifies his argument by submitting that inclusivity, diversity, pluralism, co-existence, freedom of expression of thoughts and conscience, preserving human rights, equality, social justice, fairness, harmony, right to life and liberty, and justice are core elements and values of "democracy". Besides, the desire of a population who belongs to and shares the same ethnic group, culture, language, etc. to form and exists in an independent country, is the core element of "nationalism". Eliminating one of the four principles of the fundamental state policies, i.e. "secularism" from the Constitution will make the rest of the three fall flat. Moreover, removing the principle "secularism" from the Constitution, which would render Bangladesh as a non-secular country, will undermine and limit the application of Articles 19, 23, 23 A, 25, 27, 31 and 39 of the Constitution.

306. In the age of frontier technologies, as he submits, like artificial intelligence (Al), robotics and big data, non-secular policies risk embedding religious biases in technological systems result in inequities and unfairness. For example, in China, biased Al surveillance disproportionately targets Uyghur Muslims, thus, perpetrates discrimination. Hence, secularism is essential to ensure technology is governed by universal ethics, inclusivity and fairness, and fosters an environment conducive to innovation, privacy, and security.

307. Conversely, he goes to argue that non-secularism can hinder intellectual property, creative expressions, and technological progress by imposing religious or ideological restrictions. In this connection he submits that religious or ideological doctrines that often guide policies and cultural norms in a non-secular State can significantly impact intellectual property, innovation, and creative works, that ultimately results in stifling the economic growth of a country. Secular governance, by contrast, nurtures creativity and innovation, being free from bias or conformity. In order to foster innovation and creativity, it is crucial to ensure that governance, regulations and policies remain neutral, inclusive and adaptive to the evolving societal and technological needs.

308. In this regard, he also goes to argue that the 1971 liberation war was not only about political independence but also about rejecting the religious division enthused by Pakistan's two-nation theory. Bangladesh was established as a secular country to provide a platform for its religiously diverse population, i.e. Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, and Muslims, to live in harmony and pluralism. The framers of our Constitution sought to create a political environment where religion would not be used for political control, believing that secularism was crucial for a just and egalitarian society. By including secularism within the fundamental state policies, they aimed to ensure that laws and governance were free from religious influence and grounded in universal human rights and justice. Today, secularism remains a key aspect of Bangladesh's socio-political identity, and ensures the separation of religion from state affairs.

309. Lastly, he submits that whether it is the Liberation War of 1971, the movement of 1990, or of 2024, the martyrs who sacrificed their lives for independence, freedom, and human dignity remind us of the invaluable nature of unity, human rights, equality and justice in our society. The lives we lost stood in harmony for a shared purpose. Their legacies must live in our actions, guiding us to carry forward their cause, ensuring it leads us towards unity, not division.

310. Accordingly, he submits, considering the greater interest of the nation the prayer so made by the petitioner of writ petition No.12431 of 2024 challenging incorporation of the word "secularism" in the Preamble and other respective Articles of the Constitution may kindly be negated.

311. However, considering the facts and circumstances of the case including the observations and findings so made above on the respective Articles of the Constitution it is the categorical findings of this Court that except Article 58A and Chapter IIA, Article 142 so far it relates to repeal of referendum, Articles 7A and 7B and Article 44(2) of the Constitution, the legality and propriety of all other impugned Sections of the Act No.14 of 2011, i.e. the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 vide which respective Articles of the Constitution including its Preamble have been amended by the Parliament by way of insertion, modification, substitution, repeal etc., are left to be looked into/decided by the successor Parliament in accordance with law.

312. In the light of the above observations and findings following decisions have been taken by this Court:
a) Act No. 14 of 2011, i.e. Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 is found not void as a whole;
b) The repeal of Article 58A and Chapter IIA of the Constitution with regard to Non-Party Caretaker Government vide Sections 20 and 21 of the Act No.14 of 2011 has destroyed the basic structure of the Constitution, i.e. democracy; hence, those two sections are declared void being ultra vires the Constitution, with prospective effect;
c) With the repeal of referendum, as it was part of Article 142 of the Constitution vide Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 has negated the will of the people to express their opinion on the amendability of the Preamble and Articles 8, 48 and 56 of the Constitution; hence, repealing the provision of referendum under Article 142 vide Section 42 of the Act No.14 of 2011 is declared void, being repugnant to and inconsistent with the basic structure of the Constitution. Consequently, Article 142 as it then was vide Twelfth Amendment Act, 1991 is hereby restored;
d) Incorporating Articles 7A and 7B after Article 7 of the Constitution is squarely contradictory to Article 7, guaranteeing the will of the people and the supremacy of the Constitution including the right of freedom of thought and conscious and of speech and expression. It also, has taken away the power of amendability of the successor Parliament. Hence, it is declared void and a nullity in the eye of the supreme law of the land, i.e. the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh. Consequently, Section 7 of the Act, 2011 incorporating Articles 7A and 7B after Article 7 of the Constitution is hereby declared void being ultra-vires the Constitution;
e) High Court Division is the creature of the Constitution with plenary power of judicial review over the impugned actions of the executive, even the legislature. It has the power to declare amendment of law void which touches the basic structure of the Constitution. Moreso, High Court Division is the guardian of the Constitution, the supreme law of the land. The Legislature vide Article 44(2) has allowed said power of the High Court Division to be swallowed up by any other court, which is the product of statute. Thus, it comes in direct conflict with Article 102(1) read with Article 44(1) of the Constitution. Accordingly, Section 18 of the Act No.14 of 2011 so far it relates to incorporation of Article 44(2) is hereby declared as void, non-est and a nullity having altered the basic structure of the Constitution; and
f) Except Article 58A and Chapter IIA, Article 142 so far it relates to repeal of referendum, Articles 7A and 7B and Article 44(2) of the Constitution, the legality and propriety of all other impugned Sections of the Act No.14 of 2011, i.e. the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 vide which respective Articles of the Constitution including its Preamble have been amended by the Parliament by way of insertion, modification, substitution, repeal etc., are left to be looked into/decided by the successor Parliament in accordance with law.

313. In the result, both the Rules in writ petition Nos. 9935 and 12431 both of 2024 are made absolute in part, without any order as to costs.

314. Before we part, we would like to observe that the constitutionality of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 2011 (Act No. 14 of 2011) has been challenged before this Court after more than 13 (thirteen) years by the conscious citizens of the country in the nature of public interest litigation representing the citizens of the nation, the citizens who are the ultimate source of power, knocking the door of the High Court Division of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, the protector and custodian of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, to listen to their cry for establishing justice, rule of law and democracy, to eliminate the concept of authoritarianism from all spheres of lives, to allow them to express their will with exercise of their right to franchise through the process of free and fair election; to allow the new generation to exercise their right to determine the law under which they want to live with change and growth in constitutional law with new hope and with the spirit of time.

315. Accordingly, we would like to extend our deep appreciation to the members of the Bar representing the respective petitioners and interveners including the learned Attorney General and his team of the Attorney General office who represented the government and appeared in this matter in support of the issue in question, for assisting this Bench towards proper dispensation of justice.

316. Communicate this judgment and order to all concerned.
===End===
===20SCOBHCD171===
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(SPECIAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

WRIT PETITION NO. 5608 OF 2017.

Present:
Mr. Justice Md. Rezaul Hasan
And
Mr. Justice Biswajit Debnath.

Ain-O-Salish Kendra (ASK), represented by its Executive Director, 7/17, Block-B, Lalmatia, Dhaka and others.
......Petitioners.

-Versus-

Bangladesh, represented by its Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Public Works, Bangladesh Secretariat, Dhaka, and others.
......Respondents.

Mr. Md. Anisul Hassan with Mr. Abdullah Al Mahmud, Mr. Mohammad Sayeed Abrar, Mr. Md. Ahsan Ullah, Mr. Hossain Mohammad Shahidul and Mr. Md. Salequzzaman, Advocates.
......For the Petitioners.

Mr. Hasibul Huq, Advocate.
......For the respondent No.2.

Mr. Mohammad Arshadur Rouf, Additional Attorney General with Mr. Syed Ejaz Kabir, DAG with Mr. Waliul Islam Oli, DAG and Mr. Md. Abdul Jabbar Joel, AAG, Mr. Md. Esa, A.A.G, Mrs. Rafiza Alam Lucky, A.A.G., Mr. Md. Joynal Hussain, A.A.G., Mrs. Mahbuba Tasnim Akhi, AAG.
......For other Respondents.

Date of Hearing: 02-07-2025
Date of Judgment: 08-07-2025.

JUDGMENT

Md. Rezaul Hasan, J:

1. This Rule Nisi has been issued calling upon the respondents to show cause as to why the purported issuance of Memo No. D-2/ UBpro-5/ Fa-26/ 420 dated 09.04.2017, issued by respondent No.6 s evidenced by Annexure-A Series, directing the petitioner No. 2-4 and other slum dwellers of Shaymoli Road No. 2 Bosti to vacate their houses situated Shaymoli Kazi Office, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka 1207, in violation of their fundamental rights to equality before law, to be treated in accordance with law and their rights to life and livelihood guaranteed under Article 27, 31 and 32 of the Constitution of Bangladesh, shall not be declared to have been made without lawful authority and to be of no legal effect and further, as to why the attempt to evict the petitioner nos. 2-4 and about 2000 other inhabitants along with 500 houses from the area known as "Shaymoli Road No. 2 Bosti" situated at Road No. 2, Shaymoli Kazi Office, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka 1207, shall not be declared to be without lawful authority, being in violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 27, 31 and 32 of the Constitution of Bangladesh and/or pass such other or further order or orders as to this Court may seem fit and proper.

2. The facts, relevant for disposal of this Rule, in brief, are that, the petitioner No. 1 is Ain-O-Salish Kendra (ASK), described as a human rights and legal aid organization, registered under the Registration Act, 1860, as well as with the NGO Affairs Bureau. The petitioner Nos. 2 is an inhabitant of the slum namely "Shaymoli Bosti" by occupation bricklayer, the petitioner No. 3 is a house wife, who took shelter in the said Bosti with her family due to river erosion destroying her village and the petitioner No. 4 is a tea-seller. Further case of the petitioners is that, the petitioner Nos. 2-4 along with many others have raised structures and were residing with their families in a piece of land, comprising about 3/4 acres, in the said Bosti and that they have no other property to take resort to. It has also been stated that, according to the information gathered by the Petitioner No. 1, some 40% of the male inhabitants of the slum are rickshaw pullers, 10% auto rickshaw drivers, 7% garments worker, 23% day laborers, 2% wood technicians, 1% carpenters, 5% vegetable sellers, 3% night guards, 6% involved in small businesses. Among the women, 65% works in garments sector, 5% day laborers, 2% household workers and the rest are looking after their children and homes. There is no gas supply, minimal sanitation, with many compelled to use polluted well water. Through contributions approved by the government and operated by non-governmental organizations, sanitary latrines have been made available to the majority of the inhabitants, while some minimal waste collection operations are also conducted; that, about 20% of children get access to education through NGO schools and some basic health care facilities particularly for maternal and child health. The further case of the petitioners is that, on 09.04.2017, the respondent No. 6 has issued three notices requiring the petitioner Nos. 2-4 to vacate their premises all under   -/-/-/ dated 09.04.2017, within 14.04.2017 and being aggrieved thereby, petitioners have moved this writ petition under Article 102 read with Article 44 of the Constitution and obtained the instant Rule.

3. The respondent No. 2, Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Industries, has appeared and filed an affidavit-in-opposition, in which it has denied all material allegations made in the writ petition. It has also been stated in the affidavit-in-opposition that, the Rule has become infructuous because none of the petitioners, nor anybody else does stay in the said premises now. It has further been stated that, the office accommodations for NPO and department of Patent Design and Trademark could not be provided due to unlawful occupation of the land allotted to them. It has further been stated that, the Respondent No. 1 has allotted 0.42 acres land, lying at Plot No. F-20A, Agargaon Administrative Area, Sher-E-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka, in favour of the Respondent No. 2 for the construction of the office building with modern facilities for the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, vide its allotment letter dated 22.09.2008 and that, after completing all legal formalities, on 18.05.2009, the said allotted plots were handed over by the Respondent No. 1, to the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, vide a transfer Certificate ("Annexure-4"). It has further been stated that, the project for the construction of the office building of the Respondent Nos. 3. and 4 with modern facilities was approved by the Planning Division of the Respondent No. 2 on 29.12.2016 and 22.01.2016 vide its memo No. 36.00.0000.085.031.17-05 (Ka) dated 22.01.2017 ("Annexure-5 and 6"). It has also been stated that, some Government Office of the Respondent No. 1 are running in the rented buildings on payment of a huge rent. Thus the construction building of National Productively Organization and Department of Patents Designs and Trademarks is necessary for saving the public money (Annnexue-15); that, the petitioner Nos. 2 to 4 and other inhabitants are illegally residing upon the allotted land of the Respondent as trespassers; that they have no right, title and interest over the said land. There arises no question of violation of fundamental rights as they are trespassers and that the eviction is lawful as per provisions of section 5(1) of the Government and Local Authority Lands and Buildings (Recovery of Possession) Ordinance, 1970. Hence, the instant Rule has no merit and it is liable to be discharged for ends of justice.

4. Learned Advocate Mr. Md. Anisul Hassan, Mr. Abdullah Al Mahmud, Mr. Mohammad Sayeed Abrar, Mr. Md. Ahsan Ullah, Mr. Hossain Mohammad Shahidul and Mr. Md. Salequzzaman appeared on behalf of the petitioners. They, having placed the petition and the materials on record, first of all submit that, the petitioner No. 1 is an entity registered under the Societies Registration Act as well as with the NGO Bureau of the Government and they have filed this application as PIL. They proceed on that, the petitioner Nos. 2-4 are helpless people dwelling in the slum. They next submit that, these petitioners have filed this writ petition in the form of public interest litigation (PIL) in order to protect their interests along with the interest of other 2000 slum dwellers, who have been directed to vacate their houses situated in the said "Bosti" and that they have no other place to take shelter. They further submit that, there is a government policy to rehabilitate the slum dwellers, but without paying any heed to it, the respondent No. 6 has issued the impugned notices to vacant their houses by 14.04.2017. They also submit that, the petitioners have fundamental right to stay there in as much as their right to life and shelter are protected under the Constitution. They proceed on that, the impugned notices requiring the petitioners to vacate their shelters in the said Bosti are liable to be declared to have been issued without lawful authority and are of no legal effect. In support of their contention they have cited the decision reported in 19 BLD (HCD) (1999) 488: Ain-O-Salish Kendra (ASK) and others Vs. Government of Bangladesh, 21 BLD (HCD) (2001) 446: Kalam and others Vs. Bangladesh and others, and another decision reported in 60 DLR (HCD) (2008) 749: Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust and others Vs. Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh and others. They pray for making the Rule absolute.

5. Learned Additional Attorney General Mr. Mohammad Arshadur Rouf with learned Deputy Attorney Generals Mr. Syed Ejaz Kabir and Mr. Waliul Islam Oli, learned Assistant Attorney Generals Mr. Md. Joynal Hussain, Mr. Md. Abdul Jabbar Joel, Mrs. Mahbuba Tasnim Akhi appeared on behalf of the Respondent No. 2. Learned Additional Attorney General, on the other hand, submits that, these petitioners have been illegally occupying the public property, while there is no particulars, nor any description of other alleged 1500-2000 slum dwellers. Next, referring to the impugned notices, all dated 09.04.2017, requiring the petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 4 to vacate the premises by 14.04.2017, the learned Additional Attorney General submits that, these notices have been issued under section 5(1) of the Government and Local Authority Lands and Buildings (Recovery of Possession) Ordinance, 1970, and the petitioners have received the notices and they were given minimum 7(seven) days time as permitted by the proviso to the sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Ordinance. He proceeds on that, the law does not make any discrimination between the slum dwellers or any other persons so far as the question of eviction under the aforesaid Ordinance is concerned. He next submits that, there is no evidence supporting that, the petitioners were living in the slum or Bosti for 20 years, however, even if that were true, that does not create any legitimate right or expectation to perpetuate their unlawful occupation. He next submits that, a huge quantity of public properties of the Government are unlawfully occupied by the land gabbers who are getting these low income people sheltered and settled there, to earn rents from these shelters even by unauthorizedly connecting the electricity, gas and water lines. He candidly submits that, there are lots of reports that, some hardened criminals also take shelter in the slums and operate their criminal activities in the City. Referring to the statements made in the affidavit-in-opposition, the learned Additional Attorney General submits that, the land in question has been allotted to the Ministry of Industries (Respondent No. 2) for establishment of the office building with modern facilities for the Respondent No. 3 and 4, vide its allotment letter dated 22.09.2008 and the possession was handed over to them, by the Respondent No. 1, on 18.05.2009 (Annexure-4). But, the government could not construct the buildings, which were very much urgent, particularly to facilitate the development of trade, industries and foreign investment in the country. He has referred to the impugned notices and submits that, in the previous notice dated 03.304.2017, the petitioners were asked for vacating the premises, but they did not, thereby causing serious prejudice to the national interest and have impeded the development program of the Government. He next submits that, the decisions cited by the learned Advocate for the petitioner has no relevance in the facts and circumstances of the present case. He continues that, the premises are now vacant, vide the colored photographs annexed to the supplementary affidavit. He concludes that, this Rule has no merit and the same may kindly be discharged.

6. We have heard the learned Advocates for the petitioners, the learned Additional Attorney General and Deputy Attorney Generals, perused the petition, the supplementary affidavits, affidavit-in-oppositions and other materials on record.

7. In the facts and circumstances of this case, when the right to shelter is sought to be protected under the writ jurisdiction of this Court, we are constraint to consider the Article 15 of the Constitution, that reads as follows:-

"15. It shall be a fundamental responsibility of the State to attain, through planned economic growth, a consistent increase of productive forces and a steady improvement in the material and cultural standard of living of the people, with a view to securing to its citizen-
(a) the provision of the basic necessities of life, including food, clothing, shelter, education and medical care;
(b)
(c)
(d)
.". (Emphasis supplied).

8. Therefore, the right to shelter claimed by the petitioner Nos. 2-4 are coming within the purview of 'Fundamental Principles' of State policy, under Part II of the Constitution, not under 'Fundamental Rights', described under part III of the Constitution. Law, in this respect, is settled that, the 'Fundamental Principles of the State policy cannot be enforced by this Court under its writ jurisdiction. Hence, we find that this Rule is liable to be discharged on maintainability point alone.

9. We have next adverted our attention to the impugned notices and we find that, the petitioners have received these notices, all dated 09.04.2017, issued by the Respondent No. 6, requiring them to vacate the premises occupied by them. The petitioners also did not deny that they were unlawfully occupying the premises in question, which is owned by the Government.

10. It is also not disputed that, the notices issued on 09.04.2017 are all sent as reminders or "", whereby the petitioner Nos. 2-4 were required to vacate the premises by 14.04.2017. We also find that, in all the notices it has been mentioned that, the petitioners were earlier issued notices dated 28.03.207, requiring them to vacate the premises by 03.04.2017, but they did not.

11. We further find that, the impugned notices have been issued, in the circumstances, pursuant to the provisions of section 5(1) of the Government and Local Authority Lands and Buildings (Recovery of possession) Ordinance, 1970. Section 5(1) of the Ordinance, 1970 reads as follows:-

"5(1) If the Deputy Commissioner, on his own motion or on the complaint of or upon information received from anybody or a Local Authority, is satisfied after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, that a person is an unauthorized occupant, he may issue, in the prescribed manner, a notice directing such person to vacate the land, building or part thereof in his occupation within a period of thirty days from the date of service of the notice.
Provided that, the Deputy Commissioner may, where he is satisfied that thirty days' notice will not be in public interest, reduce the period of such notice to not less than seven days."

12. Therefore, we find and hold that, issuance of the aforesaid notices upon the petitioner Nos. 2-4 are permitted by law and the petitioners have been treated in accordance with law and that there was no violation of any fundamental rights of theirs.

13. We are also of the opinion that, no length of unlawful occupation will validate the same, nor will create any legitimate expectation to get immunity from eviction under the Ordinance. Law in this respect is equal for all, slum dwellers or not.

14. Besides, having considered the statements made in the affidavit-in-opposition, we find that, the Respondent No. 1 has allotted the land measuring 0.42 acres of land lying at Plot No. F-20A of Agargaon Administrative Area of Sher-E-Bangla Nagar in favour of the Respondent No. 2 for the construction of the office building with modern facilities for the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, vide its allotment letter dated 22.09.2008 and that, after completing all legal formalities, on 18.05.2009 said allotted plot was handed over by the Respondent No. 1 to the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, vide a transfer Certificate ("Annexure-4").

15. We also find that, the properties in question are most valuable properties situated at the prime location of the capital city, and has been earmarked for very important public offices, who are expending from public exchequer, in the form of rents, for housing their respective offices. Hence, the balance on the issue of public interest should weigh in favour of recovering the public properties and to make it available to the allottees.

16. We have carefully examined the decision, reported in 59 DLR (AD) 176: Rabia Bhuiyan MP Vs. Ministry of LGRD and others, and find that, the Appellate Division has held in that case, that "the High Court Division fell in error in rejecting the writ petition summarily without at all considering the responsibilities of the respondents under the above law and Rules and their inaction. Directions from the Court would provide a necessary catalyst to ensuring due compliance of such bodies with their statutory obligations and policy commitments".

17. As such, the decision of the Appellate Division, quoted above, is pertaining to the propriety of summary rejection of a writ petition by the High Court Division. We respectfully endorse the view and, indeed, it is settled law that, when a serious question of law or Constitution would arise in a writ petition that should not be summarily rejected by the High Court Division. This law has been set at rest by the then Supreme Court of Pakistan, when were part of it.

18. We shall not ignore taking judicial notice of the facts that, reportedly in many Bosti in Dhaka City or near the Dhaka City, (namely, Shonpara Bosti), have become safe-shelters or dens for habitual criminals, arms and drug dealers and other serious miscreants. However, for that reason, the agony, safety, security and protection of the helpless or displaced poor people should not be overlooked by the administration. Their actions and scheme should be in consonance with the letters and sprit of Article 15 of the Constitution.

19. Hence, the petitioner No. 1, Ain-O-Salish Kendra, should have given authentic and clear identity of the slum dwellers along with all relevant particulars (namely- their occupation, age, gender etc.) in a separate schedule attached to the petitioner (if not to be named as petitioners). If interference under Article 102 is genuinely desired, the petitions should be drafted and presented in proper manner, so that the court can find the relevant facts and circumstances of the case presented before it and can apply its mind for a just and proper decision. A writ petition should not be based on unverified facts or on assumptions.

20. However, the State functionaries cannot disown their responsibility to extend protection to all its citizen including the slum dwellers, so far as their life, properties and dignity are concerned. Particularly, the children, single mothers and elderly people must be treated with dignity as required by Article 11 of the Constitution. No unnecessary pressure or fear should be created in their mind. However, the administration and police shall be strict in dealing with the goons, miscreants and terrorists, disregard of their identity.

21. We have seen many reports saying that, the helpless slum dwellers were not given minimum time to wrap up their small belongies. This will be an instance of doing a lawful act in an unlawful manner.

22. This should be made clear by this Court that, any eviction to be lawful, must be done and conducted in a lawful manner. Any lawful act, if done in an unlawful manner will violate Article 31 of the Constitution.

23. However, in the facts and circumstances of this case, we find clear authority in the respondents to issue the impugned notices and in initiating the eviction process.

24. Before parting of, we should record our discontent for keeping this petition unheard for such a long time.

25. We find no merit in this Rule and the same should be discharged.

26. In the result, the Rule is discharged.

27. The order of stay granted earlier by this Court is hereby vacated.

28. Communicate this judgment and order at once.
===End===
===20SCOBHCD178===

HIGH COURT DIVISION
(SPECIAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)

WRIT PETITIONS NO. 8303 OF 2017, 8304 OF 2017, 8305 OF 2017, 8306 OF 2017, 8307 OF 2017, 8308 OF 2017, 8309 OF 2017 AND 8310 OF 2017.

Present:
Mr. Justice J. B. M. Hassan
And
Mr. Justice Razik Al Jalil

Nazrul Islam
Petitioner

-Versus-

The Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and others.
Respondents

Mr. Gazi Md. Mohsin, Advocate
For the petitioner in all the writ petitions.

Mr. Golam Sarwar, Advocate
For the respondent No.6 in writ petitions No. 8303 of 2017, 8304 of 2017 and 8309 of 2017.

Mr. Md. Kamrul Alam (Kamal), Advocate
For the respondent No.6 in writ petitions No. 8305 of 2017 and 8306 of 2017.

Mr. Tushar Kanti Roy, DAG
For the State.

Date of Hearing: 09-01-2023
Date of Judgment: 23-01-2023.

JUDGMENT

J. B. M. Hassan, J.

1. The above mentioned 8 (eight) writ petitions were filed by the sole petitioner, namely, Nazrul Islam under Article 102 (2) (b) (i) of the Constitution in the form of habeas corpus writ as full brother of the detenu, namely, Md. Zahirul Haque Momin. In all the writ petitions he obtained Rules Nisi challenging detention of the detenu, Md. Zahirul Haque Momin in connection with 8 (eight) judgment and order of conviction and sentence separately passed in 8 (eight) sessions cases under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (shortly, the NI Act). Writ petitions No. 8307 of 2017 and 8308 of 2017 having similar facts and law were heard earlier and both are fixed today for pronouncement of judgment. Similar law and facts being involved in Writ Petitions No. 8303 of 2017, 8304 of 2017, 8305 of 2017, 8306 of 2017, 8309 of 2017 and 8310 of 2017, they have also been heard together today. Now all the above mentioned 08(eight) writ petitions have been disposed of by this common judgment.

2. The detenu, Md. Zahirul Haque Momin was entangled in 08(eight) criminal proceedings under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (the NI Act) on the allegation of dishonor of 08 (eight) cheques for different amount on different dates. Eventually, after conclusion of trial of those proceedings, the judgments and orders were passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Bogura on 26.05.2011, 26.05.2011, 30.03.2010, 31.03.2010, 04.07.2010, 26.06.2010, 26.05.2011 and 26.05.2011 in Sessions Case No. 88 of 2009, 121 of 2009, 416 of 2009, 415 of 2009, 236 of 2009, 518 of 2009, 89 of 2009 and 122 of 2009 respectively. In each case, the detenu was convicted under section 138 of the Act, 1881 and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for 01 (one) year with fine.

3. Subsequently, the detenu was arrested on 17.07.2013 in connection with ST (Session Trial) Case No. 88 of 2009. In the above mentioned 8 (eight) cases the petitioner was sentenced to suffer imprisonment for one year from the date of arrest and the said period expired on 16.07.2014. Thereby, he was unauthorisedly detained from 17.07.2014. In this backdrop, the petitioner as full brother of the detenu, filed these writ petitions and obtained the present Rules Nisi.

4. Mr. Gazi Md. Mohsin, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner in all the writ petitions submits that the detenu has been convicted under section 138 of the NI Act and sentenced in 08(eight) separate criminal proceedings and that in all the cases he was sentenced for one year each. The judgments were passed with a direction to the effect that the period of sentence shall be effective from the date of his surrender or arrest by the police, whichever is earlier. He further submits that the detenu was arrested on 17.07.2013 for serving out the sentence in connection with Sessions Case No. 88 of 2009 and then conviction warrants were issued on 05.08.2013 in 07 (seven) other Sessions Cases to serve out the sentences. Thus, in all the judgments the sentences being from the date of arrest, he was required to serve until 16.07.2014 or 04.08.2014 (from conviction warrant) i.e for one year. He also submits that although section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.PC) requires to serve consecutively in respect of sentences of different proceedings but here the detenu has to serve as per direction given in the judgments effecting serveing out of sentence from the date of arrest inasmuch as the direction of the judgment can not be altered or changed. In support of his submission, learned Advocate refers to the case of MA Motaleb Bhuiyan Vs. State and another reported in 18 BLC (HCD) 451.

5. Mr. Tushar Kanti Roy, learned Deputy Attorney General (DAG) appearing for the Respondent No. 1 submits that the sentences passed in different criminal proceedings shall run consecutively in accordance with section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure unless the Court directs that subsequent sentences shall run concurrently with such previous sentence. Since there is no direction in the judgments in question, the detenu has to serve sentences of all the judgments consecutively i.e for 8 (eight) years. In support of his submission learned DAG refers to the case of Salim Raza Vs. The State and another reported Pakistan (Lahor) 1998 Criminal Law Journal 284.

6. Mr. Golam Sarwar, learned Advocate appears for the respondent No.6 in writ petitions No. 8303 of 2017, 8304 of 2017 and 8309 of 2017. Mr. Md. Kamrul Alam (Kamal), learned Advocate appears for the respondent No.6 in writ petitions No. 8305 of 2017 and 8306 of 2017.

7. We have gone through the writ petitions, cited cases and other materials on record.

8. It appears that the detenu was convicted and sentenced in eight criminal proceedings being Sessions Cases No. 88 of 2009, 121 of 2009, 416 of 2009, 415 of 2009, 236 of 2009, 518 of 2009, 89 of 2009 and 122 of 2009 by the judgments and orders dated 26.05.2011, 26.05.2011, 30.03.2010, 31.03.2010, 04.07.2010, 26.06.2010, 26.05.2011 and 26.05.2011 respectively passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Bogura.

9. All the criminal cases were tried and disposed of separately. In each case, the conviction was under section 138 of the NI Act and sentence was to suffer imprisonment for one year alongwith fine of different amount. It is undisputed that when a person is sentenced to suffer imprisonment in different cases, the sentences shall run consecutively in accordance with section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (shortly, the Code) which runs as follows:

"397. When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment, or transportation, is sentenced to imprisonment, or transportation, such imprisonment, or transportation shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment, or transportation to which he has been previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence:

Provided that if he is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment, and the sentence on such subsequent conviction is one of transportation, the Court may, in its discretion, direct that the latter sentence shall commence immediately, or at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been previously sentenced:

Provided, further, that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 123 in default of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed prior to the making of such order, the latter sentence shall commence immediately."

10. On a plain reading of the aforesaid provision, it appears that in the case more than one sentence of imprisonment, the subsequent imprisonment shall commence after the expiration of the imprisonment to which has been previously sentenced. In other words, the sentences shall run consecutively one after another i.e the sentence being one year in each case, in 8 (eight) cases the detenu has to suffer eight consecutive years, one after another. However, in the said provision there is an exception with the words "unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence" which clearly indicate that sentences of all cases may run concurrently i.e by one year if in the subsequently judgment the Court directs as above.

11. In the present cases, there is no such direction given by the Trial Court who awarded the sentences. However, we find the ordering portion of the judgments in the following terms:

"That accused, Md. Zahirul Haque Momin (Absconding) be convicted u/s 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 as amended upto date and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for a term of 1(one) year and also to pay a fine of Tk............./. The period of sentence shall be effective from the date of his surrender or arrest by police whichever is earlier. Issue conviction warrant accordingly."

12. In view of above, the period of imprisonment shall be counted from the date or his arrest or surrender before the Court, whichever is earlier. Drawing our attention to this direction, learned Advocate for the petitioner submits that it is in fact alternative words and mandate of direction as to concurrent serving out of sentences as reflected in the provision under section 397 of the Code.

13. The provision of section 397 of the Code is unambiguous and to the effect that to run the sentences concurrently there must be a clear expression as to the concurrent running of sentences with the previous sentence. But in the present judgments, we do not find such expression. Rather, the words used in the judgment are plain and simple indicating to serve it from the date of arrest or surrender for that particular sentence of imprisonment. Therefore, it cannot be said that by the judgment passed in these cases the Court below directed to run the sentences concurrently with the previous sentences. Hence, the petitioner has to serve out the sentences in all 8 (eight) criminal cases consecutively. This view of ours finds support from the case of Salim Raza Vs The State and another reported in 1998 Pakistan Criminal Law Journal (P.Cr.L.J) 284 (Lahore) relevant portions of which are as follows:

"4. I have given my anxious consideration to the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties, gone through the record, relevant provisions of Cr.PC and two precedent cases relied by the learned Additional Advocate-General, the learned counsel for the petitioner referred to section 35, Cr. P.C. The same is a relevant to the present controversy as the petitioner has been convicted at separate trials and not at same trial for two or more offences. The case covered by section 397, Cr. P.C., which reads as under:-

"Sentence of offender already sentenced for another offence. When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment (imprisonment for life) is sentenced to imprisonment or (imprisonment for life), such imprisonment or (imprisonment for life) shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment or (imprisonment for life) to which he has been previously sentenced, unless the Court directs the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous sentence....."

14. It is clear from the above provision that it is within the discretion of the Court passing the second conviction to make the sentence concurrent but in the absence of any direction the same shall run consecutively. In the case in hand the learned Sessions Judge was not pleased to exercise the discretion in favour of the petitioner. There is no difficulty in arriving of the conclusion from the facts record that one conviction was earlier in time and the same was followed the conviction in the other case. The trial Court has given the petitioner benefit section 382-B, Cr. P.C., therefore, it could safely be inferred that the omission or failure to make discretion about the sentence being concurrent or otherwise must be intentional. This view is supported by the observation of late Md. Justice M.R. Kiani in the case of Mian Gulzar Muhammad (supra). The relevant section reads as under:-

"....I hold that the accused was undergoing his first sentence when the second and third were pronounced on him and that consequently, where there is nor order making them concurrent, they will be undergone consecutively. The petition is dismissed."

15. We have also gone through the case reported in 18 BLC (HCD) 451 cited by the learned Advocate for the petitioner wherein the High Court Division held that judgment can not be changed, revised or reviewed and after pronouncement of judgment the Court becomes functus-officio. The ratio was laid down in hearing of an application for recalling previous judgment and order passed in the absence of the petitioner but the present case having distinct facts, the cited case is not applicable.

16. In view of above discussions, we do not find any merit in these Rules Nisi.

17. In the result, the Rules Nisi issued in Writ Petitions No. 8303 of 2017, 8304 of 2017, 8305 of 2017, 8306 of 2017, 8307 of 2017, 8308 of 2017, 8309 of 2017 and 8310 of 2017 are discharged without any order as to costs.

18. The petitioner is directed to surrender before the Court below to serve out the remaining sentences, if those are not interfered by any higher forum.

19. Communicate a copy of this judgment and order to the respondents at once.
===End===